
--- PDF PAGE 343 ---
330 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
FIGURE 11.5  RNN memory dynamics.
  newgenrtpdf

--- PDF PAGE 344 ---
331 Dynamical Systems and Differential Equations for RNNs
 xtdx t
dtkx t ()()=− () 
where k > 0 is a constant. In this case, the system has a fixed point at x* =  0. The stability of this 
fixed point can be analyzed by observing how the state changes for different initial conditions. If 
x(t) starts at a positive value, it will gradually decay toward zero, indicating that the fixed point at 
x* =  0 is stable. This behavior models how some RNNs stabilize over time to produce consistent 
outputs. In more complex RNNs , ODEs  can model situations where multiple fixed points exist. For 
example, consider the ODE :
 dx t
dtxt xt()=()−()3 
This system has three fixed points: x* =  – 1, 0, and 1. The stability of these points can be determined 
by analyzing the derivative of the function around these points. In this case, x* =  – 1 and x* =  1 are 
stable fixed points, while x* =  0 is unstable. This means that the system will converge to either –  1 
or 1, depending on the initial state, but if the system starts exactly at x =  0, any small perturbation 
will push it away from this point.
11.3.3   t raining  and dynamic S
Training of RNNs  can be very difficult, especially in deep networks where the training process can 
act like chaotic systems. Small changes in settings can lead to very different results, making the 
network’s behavior hard to predict. Ideas from dynamical systems theory, such as chaotic behavior 
and bifurcations, can help us understand and manage these challenges. In deep RNNs , even small 
changes in the weights can cause big changes in the output, similar to chaos in dynamical systems. 
Tiny changes in the starting conditions can lead to very different outcomes over time. For example, 
imagine an RNN  with a single neuron where the hidden state ht at time t is calculated as:
 h Wh Wxth tx t+=+1tanh( )  
Here, Wh is the recurrent weight, Wx is the input weight, and xt is the input at time t. Suppose:
 Wh =  0.9, Wx =  1.0, Initial state h0 =  0.5 and Input sequence x =  [1,0,1,0]  
The hidden states over time would be:
 •h1 =  tanh(0.9 × 0.5 +   1 × 1) =   tanh(1.45) ≈ 0.9,
 •h2 =  tanh(0.9 × 0.9 +   1 × 0) =   tanh(0.81) ≈ 0.67,
 •h3 =  tanh(0.9 × 0.67 +   1 × 1) =   tanh(1.603) ≈ 0.92,
 •h4 =  tanh(0.9 × 0.92 +   1 × 0) =   tanh(0.828) ≈ 0.68.
Now, suppose we make a small change in the recurrent weight, increasing Wh slightly to 0.91. The 
hidden states will change as follows:
 •h1 =  tanh(0.91 × 0.5 +   1 × 1) =   tanh(1.455) ≈ 0.9,
 •h2 =  tanh(0.91 × 0.9 +   1 × 0) =   tanh(0.819) ≈ 0.67,
 •h3 =  tanh(0.91 × 0.67 +   1 × 1) =   tanh(1.611) ≈ 0.92,
 •h4 =  tanh(0.91 × 0.92 +   1 × 0) =   tanh(0.835) ≈ 0.68. 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 345 ---
332 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
The changes in the output may seem small here, but as the network gets deeper, small changes like 
this accumulate, leading to chaotic behavior where outputs can change unpredictably. Bifurcations 
occur when a small change in a parameter causes a qualitative change in the network’s behavior. 
Consider the same RNN , but instead of a small change, we increase Wh significantly from 0.9 to 1.2. 
The hidden states now evolve as follows:
 •h1 =  tanh(1.2 × 0.5 +   1 × 1) =   tanh(1.6) ≈ 0.92,
 •h2 =  tanh(1.2 × 0.92 +   1 × 0) =   tanh(1.104) ≈ 0.8,
 •h3 =  tanh(1.2 × 0.8 +   1 × 1) =   tanh(1.96) ≈ 0.96,
 •h4 =  tanh(1.2 × 0.96 +   1 × 0)=  tanh(1.152)≈0.82.
Compared to the previous example, a larger change in the weight Wh has caused the hidden state to 
jump to much higher values. This is a bifurcation point, where the small increase in the weight led 
to a qualitative change in the RNN ’s behavior, making the network more prone to oscillations or 
even chaotic patterns. These dynamics make training RNNs  difficult because even small parameter 
changes can lead to instability or chaotic behavior, disrupting the training process. Gradient clipping 
can prevent weights from growing too large, helping to avoid bifurcations or chaotic dynamics.
11.3.4   v aniShing and exploding  gradient S
One big problem when training deep RNNs  is the vanishing and exploding gradient issue. To under -
stand this, think of RNNs  as dynamic systems where each step is like a moment in time. As the 
RNN  processes more steps (or inputs), the gradients used to update the model during training can 
either get very small (vanish) or become too large (explode), making the model hard to train. This 
happens because, like in dynamic systems where states can grow or shrink over time, RNNs  can 
have their gradients affected the same way during backpropagation. If the gradients vanish, the 
model has trouble learning long-  term dependencies because the updates become too small. If the 
gradients explode, the updates become too large, causing the training to become unstable. To fix 
exploding gradients, a common method is gradient clipping, which limits the size of the gradients 
during backpropagation to keep them from getting too big. For the vanishing gradient problem, 
more advanced RNN  architectures like long short-  term memory (LSTM) networks and gated recur -
rent units (GRU) were created. These architectures have built-  in systems that help keep important 
information over long sequences, thus allowing the model to remember things for longer and avoid 
the vanishing gradient issue. Additionally, techniques like batch normalization can also help by 
stabilizing gradients during training, making the optimization process smoother and improving 
the model’s performance. A helpful way to understand this issue is by viewing RNNs  as dynamic 
systems, where each step in an RNN  is like a moment in time. Over time, the gradients used to 
update the network’s parameters can either become too small (vanish) or grow too large (explode), 
making training difficult. To make this clearer, let’s look at an example. Imagine an RNN  processing 
a sequence over 10 time steps. If the gradient at each step is slightly smaller than 1 (say 0.8), after 
10 steps, the gradient would shrink as follows:
 •After 1 step: 0.8,
 •After 2 steps: 0.8 × 0.8 =   0.64,
 •After 3 steps: 0.8 × 0.64 =   0.512,
 •...,
 •After 10 steps: 0.810 =  0.107.
After 10 steps, the gradient decreases to around 0.107. This small value makes it hard for the net -
work to learn because the gradient becomes too tiny to make useful updates to the model’s weights;   

--- PDF PAGE 346 ---
333 Dynamical Systems and Differential Equations for RNNs
this is the vanishing gradient problem. Now let’s see what happens with an exploding gradient. 
Suppose the gradient at each step is slightly larger than 1 (say 1.2). Over the same 10 steps:
 •After 1 step: 1.2,
 •After 2 steps: 1.2 × 1.2 =   1.44,
 •After 3 steps: 1.2 × 1.44 =   1.728,
 •...,
 •After 10 steps: 1.210 =  6.191.
In this case, after 10 steps, the gradient has grown to about 6.191. As the network gets deeper, this value 
continues to grow larger, making the training unstable and causing the weights to update too aggres -
sively; this is the exploding gradient problem. Gradually clipping is often used to deal with exploding 
gradients. This method limits the size of the gradients during backpropagation so that they don’t grow 
too large. For example, if the gradient exceeds a certain value (say 5), it’s clipped to 5. This helps keep 
the training process stable. These architectures have special gates that help maintain important infor -
mation over time, allowing the model to avoid losing the gradient in long sequences.
Figure 11.6  illustrates critical challenges and dynamics within RNNs, focusing on the vanishing 
and exploding gradient problems as well as memory retention behavior. Figure 11.6 a highlights the 
vanishing and exploding gradient issues encountered during training RNNs . The x- axis represents 
the timestep, while the y- axis shows the gradient magnitude. The blue line indicates the vanishing 
gradient, where the gradient value diminishes over time, approaching zero as timesteps increase. 
This phenomenon hampers the RNN ’s ability to learn and update weights effectively, especially for 
long-  term dependencies. In contrast, the red line represents the exploding gradient, where the gra -
dient magnitude increases exponentially with each timestep. This can lead to instability in training as 
the gradient becomes excessively large, making it challenging to converge. Figure 11.6 b illustrates 
the memory dynamics of an RNN , focusing on how the network retains and decays information over 
time. The x- axis represents the timestep, while the y- axis denotes the memory state. The green curve 
shows memory decay, where the memory state gradually reduces as time progresses. This decay 
demonstrates how RNNs  struggle to maintain information over long sequences, contributing to dif -
ficulties in capturing long-  term dependencies without enhancements like LSTMs  or GRUs , which 
are designed to preserve memory over extended periods.
11.4  DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS AND DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS FOR DEEP 
LEARNING
The interplay between dynamical systems and differential equations offers a rich framework for 
understanding and improving deep learning models, particularly RNNs . In RNNs , small differences 
in the initial states or input data can lead to completely different outputs, making the network’s 
behavior hard to predict. This sensitivity can be both good and bad. On one hand, it allows the net -
work to capture complex patterns. On the other hand, it can make training the network unstable. 
Looking at RNNs  from the perspective of dynamic systems helps us understand these complexities 
and shows how they can work well with new data.
11.4.1   l otka– volterra  eQuation S and neural  network S
The Lotka–  V olterra equations, also known as the predator–  prey equations, are a pair of first-  order, 
non- linear differential equations used to describe the dynamics of biological systems where two 
species interact: predator and prey. The equations are:
 dx
dtxx ydy
dtxy y =− =− αβ δγ ,   
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 347 ---
334 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
where:
 •x is the number of prey,
 •y is the number of predators, and
 •αβδγ,,,  are parameters representing the interaction between the two species.
We can generate data using the Lotka–  V olterra (predator–  prey) equations and then train a neural 
network to learn their underlying dynamics. To make the concept clearer with specific numbers, let’s 
assume the following parameters:
FIGURE 11.6  (a) Vanishing and exploding gradient in RNNs, (b) memory dynamics in RNNs.  

--- PDF PAGE 348 ---
335 Dynamical Systems and Differential Equations for RNNs
 •α =  1.1 (prey reproduction rate),
 •β =  0.4 (rate of predation),
 •γ =  0.4 (predator death rate),
 •δ =  0.1 (rate of predator growth by eating prey).
Suppose we start with an initial population of 40 prey and 9 predators. Using the equations, we can 
calculate how both populations change over time. At the initial time step ( t =  0), the populations 
are: x(0) =   40, y(0) =   9.
At the next time step, we calculate the change in prey and predator populations using the differ -
ential equations:
 dx
dt=× −× ×= −= −11 40 04 40 94 4 144 100 ..  
So, the prey population decreases by 100.
 dy
dt=× ×− ×= −=01 4090 49 36 36 32 4 .. ..  
Thus, the predator population increases by 32.4. Update populations  over Δ t =  0.1:
 xxdx
dtt01 04 0 100 01 40 10 30 .. ,()=()+

=+ − ( )×=−= ∆  
 yydy
dtt01 09 32 40 1932 41 22 4 .. .. .. ()=()+

=+ ×= += ∆  
After just 0.1 unit of time, the prey population is 30 (instead of going negative), and the predators 
have risen to 12.24. By repeating these small-  step updates over many increments, you will typ -
ically see oscillatory cycles: as prey increases, predators flourish; as predators increase, they 
reduce the prey supply, leading to a subsequent predator decline, and so forth. In practice, this 
generates time-  series data that mimic real predator–  prey interactions. You can then train a neural 
network to learn these dynamics, by feeding it time-  lagged samples of ( x, y), so it can predict 
future population levels given current conditions. This offers a powerful way for neural networks 
to capture complex biological interactions and other non-  linear systems governed by differential 
equations.
Figure 11.7  illustrates the analysis of predator–  prey dynamics using the Lotka–  V olterra model 
and a neural network for population prediction. Figure 11.7 a represents the Lotka–  V olterra predator–  
prey model, showing the oscillatory relationship between prey ( x) and predator ( y) populations over 
time. The prey population (blue) and predator population (orange) exhibit periodic fluctuations, 
reflecting the cyclical nature of ecological interactions. The equations governing the system, 
dx
dtax xydy
dtxy y=−=− βδ γ and , are annotated on the plot. A key observation is marked by a red  
dot at the point of maximum predator population (23.0073), emphasizing the peak of the predator cycle. 
Figure 11.7 b compares the actual predator population (orange) against the predicted predator population 
(green, dashed) generated by a neural network. The model includes two hidden layers with 64 neurons  
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 349 ---
336 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
each. A notable point, labeled “First Prediction” (purple dot), demonstrates the neural network’s ini -
tial prediction accuracy. Despite capturing the trend, the predicted population deviates from the actual 
values, reflected in the high mean squared error ( MSE : 766.06) and poor R2 score (–  7707.30).
11.5  REAL-  WORLD APPLICATIONS AND EXAMPLES
11.5.1   m odeling  epidemic S with differential  eQuation S
Differential equations can accurately model how infectious diseases spread. One common model is 
the Susceptible, Infected, Recovered (SIR) model. This model tracks how people move from being 
susceptible to an infection to becoming infected and then recovering (or gaining immunity). By 
using these rates, public health officials can predict how an epidemic will grow and see how different 
strategies can help control it. For example, during the COVID-  19 pandemic, differential equations 
were very important for forecasting the virus’s spread. These models helped show the possible 
effects of actions like social distancing, wearing masks, and vaccination programs. This allowed 
governments and health organizations to make better, data-  based decisions. By understanding how 
fast the virus spreads and how people recover, authorities could plan and adjust their responses to 
reduce the epidemic’s impact. This mathematical approach is crucial for controlling outbreaks and 
getting ready for future waves.
11.5.2   StaBility analy SiS in engineering
In engineering, dynamical systems theory is an important tool for checking the stability of structures 
and machines. For example, in aerospace engineering, engineers study the stability of an aircraft’s 
flight path using differential equations that model how it moves through the air. These equations help 
engineers understand when an aircraft might become unstable, such as during a stall or spin, which 
could cause it to lose control. By examining these possible instabilities, engineers can create control 
systems that automatically detect and fix problems, ensuring the aircraft flies steadily. This stability 
FIGURE 11.7  (a) Lotka–  V olterra predator–  prey model. (b) Actual vs. predicted predator population. 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 350 ---
337 Dynamical Systems and Differential Equations for RNNs
analysis is essential not only for safety but also for improving the performance of aircraft in different 
flight conditions, leading to more efficient and safer aviation systems.
11.5.3   e conomic  modeling  and foreca Sting
In economics, dynamical systems and differential equations are important tools for modeling and 
predicting how markets and economies behave over time. A good example is using the Lotka–  
V olterra equations, which were first used in biology to describe predator and prey relationships, to 
model competition between companies in a market. These equations help economists study how 
things like available resources or the level of competition affect whether businesses grow or decline. 
By using these models, economists can better understand how markets work and create strategies 
or policies to encourage economic stability and growth. For example, the equations can show how 
market competition affects whether companies survive, helping decision-  makers adjust regulations 
or policies to ensure a healthy and competitive economic environment.
11.5.4   c limate  change  proJection S
Climate scientists use differential equations a lot to model the Earth’s climate and predict how human 
activities will affect it. These models include the complex interactions between the air, oceans, and 
land, tracking how things like temperature, humidity, and carbon dioxide levels change over time. 
By considering these factors, scientists can create different scenarios, such as varying amounts of 
greenhouse gas emissions. These simulations help scientists forecast possible climate changes and 
understand the likely effects of human actions. This information is essential for shaping global pol -
icies on climate action and helping governments and organizations make informed decisions about 
reducing emissions, setting environmental regulations, and adopting sustainable practices to lessen 
the impact of climate change.
11.5.5   n euro Science  and Brain dynamic S
In neuroscience, dynamical systems and differential equations help model the brain’s electrical 
activity. A famous example is the Hodgkin–  Huxley model, which uses these equations to show 
how neurons create action potentials, electrical signals that send information through the nervous 
system. These models are important for understanding how brain circuits work and how problems 
in these circuits can cause conditions like epilepsy. By studying these models, neuroscientists learn 
how brain disorders happen and can develop treatments like deep brain stimulation to restore normal 
brain function. These mathematical tools are powerful for exploring both healthy and unhealthy 
brain activity and for guiding treatment methods.
11.5.6   r oBotic S and autonomou S SyStemS
In robotics, dynamical systems theory is important for controlling how robots and self-  driving 
vehicles move. For example, path planning algorithms often use differential equations to calculate 
the best path a robot should take, making sure it reaches its destination while avoiding obstacles. 
This method is essential for designing robots that can work safely and efficiently in changing envir -
onments. For instance, drones flying through complicated areas or robotic arms doing precise tasks 
in factories rely on these models to adjust their movements in real time. By using dynamical systems 
theory, robots can respond to changes around them and handle new challenges, making them more 
reliable and effective in real-  world situations. 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 351 ---
338 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
11.6  HANDS-  ON EXAMPLE
We’ll simulate a scenario where the RNN  is tasked with learning a time-  dependent sequence, 
allowing us to observe the effects of memory retention and the potential occurrence of vanishing or 
exploding gradients.
11.6.1 S tep 1: import  liBrarie S
First, we import essential libraries for building machine learning models and visualizing results. 
Together, these libraries are essential for tasks ranging from building neural network models and 
handling data to visualizing results for analysis and interpretation.
import numpy as np
import tensorflow as tf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
11.6.2  Step 2: generate  Synthetic  Sine wave data
In this section, we are generating a time series dataset using the sine function. This setup is useful 
for simulating periodic data, such as waves or oscillations, which can be visualized and analyzed.
# time variable
t =  np.linspace(0, 2*np.pi, 100)
data =  np.sin(t)
11.6.3  Step 3: prepare  data for rnn : format  (Batch_ Size, timeStepS, feature S)
In this section, we are preparing the input and target data for a time series prediction model, where 
each value in the sine wave is used to predict the next value. We are creating a one-  step-  ahead pre -
diction model, where the goal is to predict the next value in the time series based on the current 
value. This reshaping process is crucial for feeding the data into machine learning models, particu -
larly RNNs or LSTMs, where the 3D input shape is required.
X =  data[:-  1].reshape(-  1, 1, 1)
Y =  data[1:].reshape(-  1, 1)
11.6.4  Step 4: define the rnn  model
In this section, we are building a simple RNN using the Keras Sequential API from TensorFlow. 
The model consists of an RNN  layer followed by a Dense output layer for time series prediction.
model =   tf.keras.Sequential([tf.keras.layers.SimpleRNN(10, 
input_ shape= (None, 1), activation=  ‘tanh ’), tf.keras.layers.
Dense(1)]) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 352 ---
339 Dynamical Systems and Differential Equations for RNNs
11.6.5  Step 5: compile  the model
Here, we are compiling the RNN  model, which prepares it for training by specifying the optimizer, 
loss function, and potentially other metrics. By compiling the model with the Adam optimizer and 
mean squared error loss, we ensure that the model will learn effectively during training by minim -
izing the prediction error on the time series data. This setup is ideal for time series prediction tasks, 
where the goal is to make accurate continuous-  value predictions.
model.compile(optimizer=  ‘adam ’, loss= ’mean_ squared_  error ’)
11.6.6  Step 6: train the model
In this line of code, we are training the RNN  model on the time series data using the fit function in 
Keras.
history =   model.fit(X, Y, epochs=  100, verbose=  0)
11.6.7  Step 7: predict  uSing the trained  model
In this line of code, we are using the trained RNN  model to make predictions on the time series 
data. This line is crucial in time series forecasting, as it allows us to observe how well the model 
has learned to predict future values based on the historical data provided during training. These 
predictions can be compared to the actual target values (Y) to evaluate the model’s performance.
predictions =   model.predict(X)
11.6.8  Step 8: plot the reSultS
In this section, we are visualizing the results of the RNN  predictions alongside the actual data using 
Matplotlib.
plt.figure(figsize=  (10, 5))
plt.plot(t[1:], Y, label=  ‘Actual Data ’)
plt.plot(t[1:], predictions, label=  ‘Predicted Data ’, linestyle=  
’- - ’)
plt.title( ‘RNN Simulation of a Sine Wave ’)
plt.xlabel( ‘Time ’)
plt.ylabel( ‘Amplitude ’)
plt.legend()
plt.show() 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 353 ---
340 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
Figure 11.8  illustrates how the RNN has learned to approximate the sine wave pattern. By  
training on sequences of the wave, the RNN  effectively captures both the amplitude and phase of  
the cycle, thus demonstrating its utility in time-  series prediction tasks. The slight discrepancies  
between the actual and predicted values underscore the challenges inherent in perfecting sequence  
modeling, particularly in capturing exact dynamics without overfitting to noise or anomalies in the  
data.
11.7  COMMON MISTAKES AND TROUBLESHOOTING TIPS
11.7.1   m iSinterpreting  dynamical  SyStemS theory
 •Mistake:  Failing to grasp the fundamental principles of dynamical systems and how they 
relate to RNN behavior.
 •Tip: Start with the basics of dynamical systems theory before diving into its applications in 
RNNs. Use simple examples and simulations to build a solid foundation.
11.7.2   o verlooking  the importance  of initial  condition S
 •Mistake:  Ignoring the sensitivity of RNNs  to initial conditions, leading to unpredictable 
behavior during training.
 •Tip: Pay close attention to the initialization of RNN  parameters. Use strategies like careful 
initialization and gradient clipping to mitigate sensitivity issues.
11.7.3   u ndere Stimating  the complexity  of training  dynamic S
 •Mistake:  Simplifying the training process of RNNs  without considering the complex dynamics 
that can arise, such as bifurcations and chaotic behavior.
 •Tip: Monitor the training process closely, looking for signs of instability. Employ regulariza -
tion techniques and dynamic learning rate adjustments to stabilize training.
FIGURE 11.8  RNN  simulation of a sine wave. 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 354 ---
341 Dynamical Systems and Differential Equations for RNNs
11.7.4   n eglecting  the vaniShing and exploding  gradient  proBlem
 •Mistake:  Failing to address the vanishing and exploding gradient problem, which can severely 
affect the training of deep RNNs .
 •Tip: Use techniques like LSTM networks, GRUs, gradient clipping, and proper initialization 
methods to manage gradient issues.
11.7.5   m iSapplying  differential  eQuation S
 •Mistake:  Incorrectly applying differential equations to model RNN  behavior, leading to 
flawed analyses.
 •Tip: Ensure a strong understanding of ODEs and their application to continuous-  time RNNs . 
Validate your models with known solutions and simpler systems.
11.7.6   o vercomplicating  model S
 •Mistake:  Creating overly complex models without sufficient justification, leading to difficul -
ties in training and interpretation.
 •Tip: Start with simpler models and gradually increase complexity as needed. Use model selec -
tion criteria and cross-  validation to ensure that added complexity improves performance.
11.7.7   f ailing  to validate  neural  network  model S
 •Mistake:  Neglecting thorough validation of neural network models, resulting in unchecked 
errors and inefficiencies.
 •Tip: Validate models using various datasets and benchmarks. Compare the performance of 
RNNs  modeled with dynamical systems theory against traditional methods.
11.8  REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What is the difference between discrete and continuous dynamical systems? Provide 
examples of each.
2. How do the Lotka–  V olterra equations model the interaction between predator and prey 
populations? What do the parameters α, β, γ represent?
3. How do RNNs retain information from previous inputs? How is this similar to the behavior 
of dynamical systems?
4. Explain how ODEs can represent certain RNNs . Why is this helpful representation?
5. Describe the challenges of training RNNs , particularly the vanishing and exploding gradients. 
How does viewing RNNs as dynamic systems help address these challenges?
6. What are bifurcations in dynamical systems, and how can similar phenomena affect the 
behavior of RNNs during training?
7. How do the concepts of chaotic behavior and sensitivity to initial conditions in dynamical 
systems relate to the predictability and complexity of RNNs ?
8. How can neural networks be used to learn the dynamics of systems described by differential 
equations, such as the Lotka–  V olterra model?
9. Why is it important to understand the behavior of dynamical systems and differential 
equations when working with deep learning models, particularly   RNNs ?
10. Discuss how the principles and tools of dynamical systems can be applied to real-  world 
problems beyond biological systems, providing at least one example. 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 355 ---
342 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
11.9  PROGRAMMING QUESTIONS
11.9.1   e aSy
Design a Sequence Generation Task for RNN  Evaluation.
1. Choose a type of sequence, such as arithmetic progressions (e.g., 2, 4, 6, 8, ...) or sinusoidal 
sequences.
2. Explain why this sequence can effectively test the RNN’s  learning capabilities.
3. Generate training data that reflects the chosen sequence.
4. Split the data into training and validation sets.
5. Train the RNN  on the training dataset.
11.9.2   m edium
Analyze RNN  Behavior with Variable Input Lengths.
1. Create datasets with varying lengths of input sequences, maintaining consistent complexity 
across datasets.
2. Adjust the RNN  architecture if necessary to handle variable input lengths.
3. Train the same RNN  model on each dataset separately.
4. Evaluate the model on a validation set that also varies in sequence length.
11.9.3   h ard
Explore the Impact of Network Depth in RNNs .
1. Modify an existing RNN  model by adding multiple recurrent layers.
2. Ensure gradient clipping is implemented to mitigate exploding gradients.
3. Prepare a dataset suitable for deep RNNs , ensuring it has enough complexity to benefit from 
deeper architectures.
4. Train the modified RNN  model using a rigorous training regime, possibly involving 
techniques like curriculum learning to gradually increase difficulty.
5. Evaluate the deep RNN  model on a test set and compare it against a shallower baseline model. 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 356 ---
343
343 DOI: 10.1201/9781032690742-1212 Quantum Computing
12.1  INTRODUCTION
Quantum computing combines ideas from quantum mechanics and computer science, and it could 
change deep learning. By using the special abilities of quantum systems, we might soon be able to 
handle and analyze data in ways that regular computers can’t. This chapter will look at how quantum 
computing can make deep learning better, such as speeding up the learning process, improving 
complex models, and even solving problems that were once impossible. We will focus on important 
quantum algorithms, like Shor’s algorithm, which can break encryption, and Grover’s algorithm, 
which can search through large databases quickly. We will also discuss how these algorithms can 
help deep learning by providing new methods to optimize and manage data.
12.2  INTRODUCTION TO QUANTUM COMPUTING
Quantum computing has grown from just an idea into a fast-  developing technology. It is based on 
quantum mechanics, a branch of science that started in the early 1900s when scientists studied how 
tiny particles behave in strange ways. It wasn’t until the 1980s that people began to understand 
what quantum computing could be. Early researchers saw that regular computers had a hard time 
simulating quantum systems efficiently. They suggested that a computer using quantum ideas could 
do these tasks better by using quantum superposition, which allows for natural parallel processing 
and could make quantum computers much faster. In the 1990s, important discoveries in quantum 
algorithms showed that quantum computing could change areas like encryption and searching 
through large databases. Even with these theoretical successes, creating real quantum computers 
was difficult because of problems like keeping quantum states stable and reducing mistakes. Since 
the 2000s, big companies have invested a lot in quantum research, and there has been significant 
progress. A major achievement happened in 2019 when a quantum processor was shown to be 
faster than classical supercomputers for certain tasks. Today, quantum computing keeps advancing 
quickly, with ongoing improvements in qubit stability, error correction methods, and algorithms, all 
building on the basic work from earlier years. Quantum computing is an exciting mix of quantum 
mechanics and computer science, using ideas that seem almost magical compared to regular physics. 
Three main ideas drive quantum computing: qubits, superposition, and entanglement.
12.2.1   QuBitS
Think of qubits as the quantum version of regular bits. While regular bits can only be a 0 or a 1, 
qubits can be both at the same time because of something called superposition. This ability allows  
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 357 ---
344 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
quantum computers look at many possibilities all at once, making them potentially much faster than 
regular computers for certain tasks.
12.2.2   Superpo Sition
Imagine a spinning coin that’s both heads and tails at the same time, only deciding which side it 
is when you stop it. Superposition works like that; it lets a qubit be in multiple states at once. This 
ability to hold and consider many possibilities all at once gives quantum computers incredible power 
for certain calculations.
12.2.3   e ntanglement
One of the strangest parts of quantum mechanics is entanglement. When two qubits become 
entangled, the state of one instantly affects the state of the other, regardless of how far apart they are. 
This “spooky action at a distance” means that if you change one qubit, it immediately influences its 
entangled partner. This allows for fast and coordinated calculations across many qubits.
12.3  QUANTUM ALGORITHMS
12.3.1   k ey Quantum  algorithm S
Quantum algorithms leverage the unique properties of quantum mechanics to solve problems more 
efficiently than classical algorithms. Two key algorithms have had a major impact and have broad 
applications.
(a) Factoring Algorithm:  This algorithm revolutionized cryptography by making it possible 
to factor large numbers exponentially faster than classical methods. While traditional 
algorithms take significantly more time as the numbers grow larger, this quantum algorithm 
uses superposition and entanglement, along with a quantum Fourier transform, to factor 
numbers quickly. This poses a serious threat to widely used encryption systems like RSA, 
pushing the need for quantum-  safe cryptography.
(b) Search Algorithm:  This algorithm dramatically speeds up the process of unstructured 
searching. In a database of N entries, the quantum algorithm can find the target in about 
√N steps, while classical methods would require N steps. By amplifying the probability of 
finding the correct answer, this algorithm is especially useful for tasks like database searches 
and optimization problems.
In Figure 12.1 , the Bloch sphere provides a three-  dimensional visualization of a qubit’s state space. 
The sphere represents all possible states a qubit can take, with different arrows showing specific 
states. The dark red arrow indicates the ∣0⟩ state, which points along the positive z- axis. This corres -
ponds to the qubit being in a pure state of 0, as seen at the top of the sphere. On the other hand, the 
dark green arrow points in the opposite direction, along the negative z- axis, representing the qubit 
in the ∣1⟩ state. This highlights the qubit being in the pure 1 state. These two states, ∣0⟩ and ∣1⟩, are 
analogous to the binary states in classical computing. The dark blue arrow, located on the equator of 
the sphere, represents the ∣+ ⟩ state. This state is a superposition of both ∣0⟩ and ∣1⟩, where the qubit 
is not purely in one state but exists in a blend of both. The positioning of the ∣+ ⟩ state on the equator 
emphasizes the fact that it is a balanced superposition, equidistant from ∣0⟩ and ∣1⟩, thereby demon -
strating the core idea of quantum superposition. 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 358 ---
345 Quantum Computing
12.3.2   Quantum  machine  learning  algorithm S
Quantum machine learning combines quantum computing with regular machine learning, opening 
up new possibilities for tasks like grouping data (clustering), sorting it into categories (classifica -
tion), and making predictions (regression). Quantum clustering methods, like the Quantum k-  means 
algorithm, improve how we group items by using quantum properties like superposition to calculate 
distances between data points all at once. For example, imagine you have 10 apples and want to 
group them by weight. With quantum clustering, the computer can compare all the apples simul -
taneously, making the process much faster than traditional methods that handle comparisons one at 
a time. Quantum classification algorithms, such as Quantum Support Vector Machines (QSVM), 
enhance how we classify data by mapping features into a higher-  dimensional quantum space. Think 
of it like sorting animals based on size, habitat, and diet. A QSVM  can make it easier to find clear 
differences, even between animals with similar traits, uncovering patterns that regular methods 
might miss. Quantum regression algorithms, like quantum linear regression, offer faster predictions 
by solving complex equations more efficiently. For instance, when predicting future temperatures 
from past data, quantum regression can quickly spot trends and create accurate forecasts, saving 
time compared to classical methods.
While quantum machine learning holds great promise, it is still in its early stages. One major 
challenge is converting regular data into quantum states, a process that can be complicated and 
time-  consuming, sometimes canceling out the speed advantages. Additionally, current quantum 
computers are prone to errors and can only hold quantum states for a limited time, which can affect 
the accuracy of calculations. For example, suppose you’re using a quantum machine learning algo -
rithm to predict stock prices based on the last 10 days’ closing prices: $150, $152, $148, $155, 
$160, $158, $162, $165, $167, and $170. First, you need to convert these numbers into quantum 
states, which is tricky. Even if the data is successfully encoded, errors might occur because the 
quantum computer may struggle to maintain its state, potentially leading to incorrect predictions. 
Instead of forecasting a rise to $175, the computer might mistakenly predict a drop to $140 due to 
the instability of the quantum system.
FIGURE 12.1  Qubit states on the Bloch sphere. 
  

--- PDF PAGE 359 ---
346 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
12.4  INTEGRATION WITH DEEP LEARNING
12.4.1   Quantum  neural  network S (Qnn S)
QNNs  combine quantum computing with artificial neural networks to boost their performance, 
especially for complex tasks like high-  dimensional data analysis and pattern recognition. QNNs  are 
built using quantum bits (qubits) instead of classical binary units, allowing them to take advantage 
of quantum mechanics, like superposition and entanglement. This gives them a huge computational 
advantage over traditional neural networks. Here’s how QNNs  work:
1. Quantum Gates as Neurons:  Each quantum neuron acts like a quantum gate, performing 
operations on input qubits while preserving quantum information.
2. Superposition and Parallelism:  QNNs  use superposition, allowing quantum neurons to pro -
cess multiple calculations at once, making the network much faster.
3. Entanglement for Feature Correlation:  Entanglement links quantum neurons, helping QNNs  
detect and relate complex data patterns more effectively than classical networks.
Suppose we have a binary classification task where we want to classify inputs into two classes based 
on a single binary feature. There are class 0 and class 1, and the two inputs are as follows: Input 0, 
with a binary value of 0, should be classified as class 0, and Input 1, with a binary value of 1, should 
be classified as class 1. To perform this classification, we will design a simple QNN  using one qubit 
and basic quantum gates. Before we proceed, let’s review some fundamental quantum computing 
concepts. Qubit is the basic unit of quantum information, analogous to a bit in classical computing. 
A qubit can be in a superposition of states ∣0⟩ and ∣1⟩: ψα β=+01 , where α and β are complex 
numbers satisfying αβ||221+=. Quantum Gates are operations that change the state of qubits. 
Examples include:
 •Hadamard Gate ( H): H=−

1
211
11
 •Pauli-  X Gate ( X) (analogous to the NOT gate): X=

01
10
 •Rotation Gate around the y- axis ( Ry): Ryθθθ
θθ()=

−








coss in
sinc os22
22  

Measurement is observing a qubit collapse of its state to either ∣0⟩ or ∣1⟩ with certain probabilities. 
Let us go to the computation steps:
Step 1.  We need to encode our classical binary inputs into quantum states. Input 0, represented by 
the quantum state ∣0⟩, and Input 1, represented by the quantum state ∣1⟩, which we obtain by 
applying the Pauli-  X gate to ∣0⟩: ∣1⟩= X∣0⟩. Quantum states for Inputs are as follows: For Input 
0, ψinput==

 01
0 and for Input 1, ψinput==

 10
1.
Step 2.  Our QNN  consists of one Qubit to represent the quantum state and one Quantum Gate 
with a trainable parameter. We’ll use the rotation gate Ry(θ) as our quantum neuron.
Step 3.  We apply the rotation gate Ry(θ) to the input qubit. The angle θ is our trainable parameter 
(analogous to weights in classical neural networks). 
  

--- PDF PAGE 360 ---
347 Quantum Computing
 •Rotation Gate Ry(θ): Ryθθθ
θθ()=

−








coss in
sinc os22
22  
 Let’s choose θπ=2 for 
demonstration:
 •Compute  Ryπ
2

: cos ,s in .ππ
42
242
2

=

=  So, , Ryπ
22
22
2
2
22
2

=−



 •Process Input 0:  ψπ
output=

 =



 Ry202
2
2
2,
 •Process Input 1:  ψπ
output=

 =−



 Ry212
2
2
2.
Step 4.  When we measure the qubit, the probability of getting ∣0⟩ or ∣1⟩ is given by the square of 
the amplitudes. For a state ψα β=+01 , probability of ∣0⟩ is P02()=||α and probability 
of ∣1⟩ is P12()=||β.
 •Calculate probabilities for Input 0: ψoutput=+2
202
21, P02
21
22
()== and 
P112()=,
 •Calculate probabilities for Input 1: ψoutput=− +2
202
21, P012()= and P112()=.
The probabilities are the same for both inputs, so the QNN  cannot distinguish between the 
classes with θπ=2.
Step 5.  Our goal is to find a θ that allows the QNN  to classify the inputs correctly. The desired 
probabilities are as follows: For Input 0 (should be Class 0), Maximize P (0), and for Input 1 
(should be Class 1): Maximize P (1). Try θ =  0 and compute Ry(0): Ry010
01()=

.
Process Input 0: |ψoutput=() =Ry00 0 : P(0) =   1 and P(1) =   0,
Process Input 1: |ψoutput=()=Ry01 1 : P(0) =   0 and P(1) =   1,
Input 0: High probability of ∣0⟩ ⇒ Class 0 (correct),
Input 1: High probability of ∣1⟩ ⇒ Class 1 (correct). 