
--- PDF PAGE 133 ---
120 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
3. Standardized Moments:  Standardized moments are the central moments divided by an appro -
priate power of the standard deviation. These moments provide shape-  related characteristics 
of the distribution, including skewness and kurtosis. The general formula is as follows:
Standardized moment=µ
σn
n
where:
 •μn is the nth central moment,
 •σ is the standard deviation.
4. Skewness (Third Standardized Moment):  We explained skewness as it measures the asym -
metry of the distribution. A skewness value of zero indicates a symmetric distribution. 
Positive skewness indicates a longer right tail, and negative skewness indicates a longer left 
tail:
Skewness=µ
σ3
3
4. Kurtosis (Fourth standardized moment):  We explained kurtosis as it measures the 
“tailedness” of the distribution. A kurtosis of 3 corresponds to a normal distribution. Values 
greater than 3 indicate heavy tails (leptokurtic), while values less than 3 indicate light tails 
(platykurtic).
Kurtosis=−µ
σ4
43
For a right-  skewed distribution with a positive skewness value of 1.5, this means that the distribution 
has a longer right tail compared to the left. If the kurtosis is greater than 3, it indicates the distribu -
tion has more extreme values or outliers compared to a normal distribution.
Figure 4.12  illustrates a comparative analysis of three different probability distributions using 
histograms: the normal distribution, the skewnorm (positive skew) distribution, and the Laplace 
(heavy tails) distribution. Figure 4.12 , top-  left, subplot displays the normal distribution in blue, 
showcasing a symmetric bell-  shaped curve centered around the mean, highlighting its character -
istic of light tails and symmetry, which indicates that data is evenly distributed around the central 
value. Figure 4.12 , top-  right, subplot presents the skewnorm distribution in green, demonstrating 
a positive skew where the tail on the right side is longer or fatter than the left. This indicates that 
a majority of the data values fall to the left of the mean, with fewer high-  value outliers stretching 
the distribution to the right. Figure 4.12 , bottom-  left, subplot depicts the Laplace distribution in 
red, characterized by a sharper peak at the mean and heavier tails compared to the normal distribu -
tion, signifying a higher probability of extreme values occurring and more variability in the data. 
Figure 4.12 , bottom-  right, subplot overlays all three distributions using their respective colors, blue 
for normal, green for skewnorm, and red for Laplace, with semi-  transparency, allowing for direct 
comparison of the distributions within the same scale and axes. This composite view highlights the 
differences in their shapes, central tendencies, and tail behaviors. Each subplot includes grid lines 
for better readability and axes labeled with “Value” and “Frequency” to indicate the data range and 
the count of occurrences within each bin, respectively. The normal distribution shows symmetry 
and light tails, suggesting data points are commonly close to the mean. The skewnorm distribution  
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 134 ---
121 Probability Theory and Statistics
FIGURE 4.12  Comparison of distribution shapes.
  newgenrtpdf

--- PDF PAGE 135 ---
122 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
highlights asymmetry due to its positive skew, indicating a tendency toward lower values with occa -
sional higher outliers. The Laplace distribution emphasizes the presence of heavy tails, implying a 
higher likelihood of extreme deviations from the mean.
4.5.1   m oment S and Bnn S
BNNs fundamentally alter the traditional NN paradigm by directly incorporating uncertainty into 
the model’s structure using probability distributions for weights. Let us explore how moments are 
critical in managing this uncertainty and influencing model performance. In BNNs, each weight is 
characterized not by a single fixed value but by a probability distribution. The first two moments 
of these distributions, the mean and variance, are particularly significant. The mean represents the 
expected value of the weight, essentially indicating the “average” strength of the connection the 
weight represents. The variance measures the uncertainty or reliability of this weight. A higher 
variance suggests less confidence in the weight’s exactness, introducing a degree of flexibility or 
hesitance in the model’s decisions.
The complexity of a BNN can have a profound impact on its performance. A highly complex 
BNN, with numerous parameters or low variance in weight distributions, might be overfitted by 
capturing not just the underlying data patterns but also the noise, including higher moments like 
skewness and kurtosis. Conversely, a too simplistic BNN might fail to capture sufficient moments of 
the data distribution, overlooking crucial information that could lead to underfitting. In BNNs, vari -
ance also plays a dual role by acting as a form of regularization. High variance on certain weights 
can indicate areas where the model should be less confident, preventing it from relying too heavily 
on data that may represent noise rather than signal. This mechanism helps to balance the model, 
ensuring it does not become overly confident based on the limited or noisy training data, thereby 
mitigating the risk of overfitting. Overfitting could occur if the model’s weights had variances close 
to 0, leading to excessive certainty in potentially noisy data patterns. In BNNs, each weight wi is 
modeled as a distribution characterized by moments (mean and variance):
 wii i  N~, µσ2()  
where:
 •μi is the mean (expected value) of the weight,
 •σi is the variance (uncertainty) of the weight.
Suppose in a BNN a particular weight has a mean of 0.5 and a variance of 0.1. The model is confi -
dent in the connection strength but allows for some uncertainty. If another weight has a variance of 
0.3, this indicates more uncertainty in that weight’s value, meaning the model is less confident in 
the connection.
Figure 4.13  illustrates the effect of weight variance in BNNs on prediction stability and con -
fidence. Figure 4.13  is divided into two subplots: In subplot Figure 4.13 a (BNN with low weight 
variance), the blue prediction lines are closely clustered around the true function, represented by the 
green line. This clustering indicates that the model’s predictions are consistent and closely aligned 
with the actual underlying relationship, demonstrating high confidence and stability. The light blue 
shaded area encompasses the range of these predictions, highlighting the model’s narrow uncer -
tainty band. Conversely, subplot Figure 4.13 b (BNN with high weight variance) showcases a more 
dispersed set of orange prediction lines surrounding the same green true function. This dispersion 
reflects the model’s increased uncertainty due to high variance in its weights, resulting in a broader 
prediction range illustrated by the light orange shaded area. 
  

--- PDF PAGE 136 ---
123 Probability Theory and Statistics
FIGURE 4.13  Effect of weight variance in BNN. (a) BNN with low variance, (b) BNN with high variance.
  newgenrtpdf

--- PDF PAGE 137 ---
124 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
4.5.2   c onnection  Between  moment S and overfitting / underfitting
Moments are crucial in shaping our understanding of data distributions and how they relate to model 
fitting in statistics and machine learning. Here, we explore how moments impact the assumptions 
behind model building and the common pitfalls of overfitting and underfitting. Statistical and 
machine learning models often rely on specific assumptions about their data distributions. For 
example, linear regression models assume that residuals are normally distributed, which pertains 
to having zero skewness (symmetry) and a certain kurtosis (peakedness). We can validate these 
assumptions by understanding moments such as mean, variance, skewness, and kurtosis. Significant 
deviations in these moments from expected values can indicate a potential misfit, suggesting that 
the model may not perform well on data that does not adhere to these assumed distributions. 
Overfitting occurs when a model too closely fits the training data, capturing noise and outliers as 
if they were true underlying patterns. This issue can arise if the model is excessively complex or 
needs to be correctly regularized. While mean and variance often receive most of the focus, higher 
moments like skewness and kurtosis are also critical. If these higher moments are influenced by 
noise, and the model attempts to accommodate them, it may overfit. Monitoring these moments 
can serve as a diagnostic tool; for instance, a model that captures extreme skewness or kurtosis 
in the training data may be overfitting, especially if these characteristics are not representative 
of the broader dataset. Conversely, underfitting happens when a model is too simplistic, often 
considering only the first moment (mean) and possibly the second (variance) but ignoring more 
complex moments such as skewness and kurtosis. This lack of complexity can prevent the model 
from capturing essential patterns in the data, leading to poor training and unseen data performance. 
Monitoring all moments provides insights into potentially overlooked data distribution aspects. For 
example, if the data exhibits high skewness or kurtosis and the model needs to account for these, it 
might underfit, failing to generalize effectively. The higher moments (skewness γ and kurtosis κ) 
are computed as:
 γµ
σκµ
σ=−( ]=−( ] [),[)XX3
34
4 
where:
 •μ is the mean,
 •σ is the standard deviation.
Suppose you are fitting a regression model to a dataset with a mean (first moment) of 0, variance 
(second moment) of 1, skewness (third moment) of 0.5, and kurtosis (fourth moment) of 3.5. If your 
model only accounts for the mean and variance, it may underfit by failing to capture the skewness 
and kurtosis of the data. Alternatively, if the model attempts to fit extreme skewness (e.g., skewness 
of 2) caused by noise in the training set, it may overfit. In overfitting, the model may overly conform 
to deviations in these higher moments (e.g., skewness and kurtosis), while in underfitting, it ignores 
these moments, leading to poor generalization. Monitoring these metrics helps diagnose and miti -
gate fitting issues.
Figure 4.14  presents a comparative analysis of how different data distributions, specifically posi -
tively skewed data and high kurtosis data, impact the performance of a simple linear regression 
model. Figure 4.14 a displays positively skewed data generated using a skewed normal distribution. 
The scatter plot, depicted in blue, shows a concentration of data points on the left side with a tail 
extending to the right, characteristic of positive skewness. The orange line represents the linear fit 
applied to this skewed data. Due to the asymmetry in the data distribution, the linear model fails to 
capture the underlying trend effectively, resulting in a fit that does not align well with the majority of  
  

--- PDF PAGE 138 ---
125 Probability Theory and Statistics
FIGURE 4.14  (a) Fit to positively skewed data, and (b) fit to high kurtosis data.
  newgenrtpdf

--- PDF PAGE 139 ---
126 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
the data points. Conversely, Figure 4.14 b on the right showcases high kurtosis data generated using 
the Laplace distribution. The scatter plot in green exhibits a sharp peak with heavy tails, indicative of 
high kurtosis. The same orange linear fit is applied to this dataset, revealing that the model struggles 
to accommodate the pronounced peak and the extreme values in the tails. This results in a linear fit 
that oversimplifies the data’s variability, failing to accurately represent the distribution’s heavy tails.
4.6  REAL-  WORLD APPLICATIONS AND EXAMPLES
4.6.1   image recognition  and proce SSing
Linear algebra is fundamental in image recognition and processing tasks. Images are typically 
represented as matrices, where each pixel is a value in a matrix. Operations like image filtering, 
transformation, and enhancement involve matrix manipulations such as convolution, eigen -
value decomposition, and singular value decomposition (SVD). convolutional neural networks 
(CNNs), which are widely used for image recognition tasks, rely on these linear algebra 
operations to extract features, recognize patterns, and classify images accurately. For example, 
in facial recognition systems, CNNs  process the pixel values of images through multiple layers 
of convolutions, pooling, and fully connected layers to identify and verify individuals based on 
their facial features.
4.6.2   n atural  language  proce SSing
Probability theory and statistics are essential in Natural Language Processing ( NLP), where models 
often need to handle the uncertainty and variability inherent in human language. Language models, 
such as those used in machine translation or text generation, rely on probability distributions to 
predict the likelihood of a word or sequence of words given a context. Bayesian methods, which 
combine prior knowledge with observed data to update beliefs, are particularly useful in NLP tasks 
that involve uncertainty. For example, in a spam detection system, Bayesian classifiers use prob -
ability distributions to calculate the likelihood that an email is spam based on the presence of certain 
keywords or phrases, making decisions even when there is ambiguity in the data.
4.6.3   r oBotic S and control  SyStemS
In robotics, the principles of multivariate calculus and linear algebra are applied to control systems 
and motion planning. Robots must navigate and interact with their environment, which requires 
solving optimization problems in real time. For example, the control of a robotic arm involves 
computing the joint angles needed to move the end effector to a desired position. This computa -
tion requires solving a system of non-  linear equations, which is achieved using techniques from 
multivariate calculus and linear algebra. Additionally, probability theory is used in robotics for state 
estimation and sensor fusion, where the robot must estimate its position and orientation based on 
noisy sensor data.
4.6.4   h ealthcare  and medical  diagno SticS
In healthcare, statistical methods and probability theory are applied to medical diagnostics and 
treatment planning. Bayesian networks, which model the probabilistic relationships between 
different variables, are used to predict the likelihood of diseases based on patient symptoms and 
medical history. For example, in a diagnostic system for cancer detection, a Bayesian network can 
integrate various risk factors, such as genetic predispositions and lifestyle choices, to estimate the 
probability of a patient having cancer. This probabilistic approach allows for more personalized and 
accurate diagnoses, enabling better treatment decisions. 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 140 ---
127 Probability Theory and Statistics
4.7  HANDS-  ON EXAMPLE
In this section, we will walk through a hands-  on example that demonstrates the application of 
probabilistic models and the handling of uncertainty in NNs using BNNs. We will use a synthetic 
dataset to show how BNNs  provide a measure of uncertainty in their predictions compared to trad -
itional NNs.
4.7.1  Step 1. S etup and import  liBrarie S
In this section, we are installing and importing the necessary packages for our project. The 
command!pip install tensorflow tensorflow-  probability matplotlib NumPy ensures that the latest 
versions of the TensorFlow, TensorFlow Probability, matplotlib, and NumPy libraries are installed. 
After installing, we import these libraries to make use of their functions and capabilities throughout 
the project.
# Install the required packages
!pip install tensorflow tensorflow-  probability matplotlib numpy
import tensorflow as tf
import tensorflow_  probability as tfp
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4.7.2  Step 2. generate  Synthetic  data
In this step, we are generating synthetic data to use in our model or for visualization purposes. 
First, by setting np.random.seed(42), we ensure that the random number generation is consistent 
across runs, which is important for reproducibility. Then, x =  np.linspace(−3, 3, 100) creates an 
array of 100 evenly spaced values between −3 and 3, which serves as the input data points. The 
corresponding y values are generated using the sine function (np.sin(x)) with added noise (0.3 * 
np.random.randn(100)) to simulate a real-  world scenario where data is often noisy. Finally, a scatter 
plot of the data is created using matplotlib, with appropriate labels for the axes and a title to describe 
the plot.
# Generate synthetic data
np.random.seed(42)
x =  np.linspace(-  3, 3, 100)
y =  np.sin(x) +   0.3 * np.random.randn(100)
plt.scatter(x, y, label=  ‘Data ’)
plt.xlabel( ‘x’)
plt.ylabel( ‘y’)
plt.legend()
plt.title( ‘Synthetic Data ’)
plt.show() 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 141 ---
128 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
4.7.3  Step 3. define the Bnn
In this step, we are defining a BNN using TensorFlow and TensorFlow Probability. First, the tf.   
keras.backend.set_  floatx(‘float64’) command ensures that all computations are done with double 
precision (64-  bit floats) for better numerical stability. The create_  bnn_  model() function builds a 
sequential model with three layers using DenseFlipout from TensorFlow Probability. DenseFlipout 
layers allow the model to learn weight distributions, enabling it to estimate uncertainty in 
predictions. The model has two hidden layers, each with 64 units and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) 
activation, and one output layer with a single unit for regression. After creating the model, it is 
compiled with the Adam optimizer and mean squared error loss, which are commonly used for 
training NNs. This setup prepares the BNN for training on data, enabling it to handle uncertainty 
in predictions effectively.
# Define a Bayesian Neural Network
tf.keras.backend.set_  floatx( ‘float64 ’)
def create_  bnn_ model():
model =  tf.keras.Sequential([
tfp.layers.DenseFlipout(64, activation=  ‘relu ’, input_  
shape= (1,)),
tfp.layers.DenseFlipout(64, activation=  ‘relu ’),
tfp.layers.DenseFlipout(1)
])
return model
bnn_ model =  create_  bnn_ model()
bnn_ model.compile(optimizer=  tf.optimizers.Adam(learning_  rate= 
0.01),
loss= ‘mean_ squared_  error ’)
4.7.4  Step 4. train the Bnn
# Train the Bayesian Neural Network
bnn_ model.fit(x, y, epochs=  1000, verbose=  0)
4.7.5  Step 5. make prediction S and plot uncertainty
In this step, we are using the previously defined BNN to make predictions and visualize the results 
along with uncertainty estimates. The x_  test array is created using np.linspace(−3, 3, 100) to gen -
erate 100 evenly spaced points within the range of −3 to 3, which serve as test inputs. The BNN 
model is run 100 times (for _   in range(100)) to obtain multiple predictions for each input point, 
capturing the model’s uncertainty. These predictions are stored in y_  pred, which is then converted 
into a NumPy array for easier manipulation. We calculate the mean (y_  pred_  mean) and standard 
deviation (y_  pred_  std) of the predictions at each test point, reflecting the model’s predictive distri -
bution. Finally, we plot the results: the original data points are shown as blue scatter points, the mean 
predictions as a red line, and the uncertainty (±2 standard deviations) as a shaded region around 
the mean. 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 142 ---
129 Probability Theory and Statistics
# Make predictions with the BNN
x_ test =  np.linspace(-  3, 3, 100)
y_ pred =  [bnn_ model(x_  test) for _   in range(100)]
y_ pred =  np.array(y_  pred)
# Calculate mean and standard deviation of predictions
y_ pred_ mean =  y_ pred.mean(axis=  0).flatten()
y_ pred_ std =  y_ pred.std(axis=  0).flatten()
# Plot the results
plt.figure(figsize=  (10, 6))
plt.scatter(x, y, label=  ‘Data ’, color=  ’blue ’)
plt.plot(x_  test, y_  pred_ mean, label=  ‘Predictive Mean ’, color=  ’red’)
plt.fill_  between(x_  test, y_  pred_ mean -  2 * y_ pred_ std, y_ 
pred_ mean +  2 * y_ pred_ std, color=  ‘red’, alpha=  0.3, label=  
’Uncertainty ( ±2 std) ’)
plt.xlabel( ‘x’)
plt.ylabel( ‘y’)
plt.legend()
plt.title( ‘Bayesian Neural Network Predictions with 
Uncertainty ’)
plt.show()
Figure 4.15  demonstrates the predictive capability and uncertainty quantification of a BNN on a 
synthetic dataset. Figure 4.15 a shows the predictive mean (red line) and the actual data points (blue). 
Figure 4.15 b highlights the uncertainty (±2 standard deviations), predictive mean, and actual data. 
The shaded area in Figure 4.15 b represents the uncertainty, showing how the BNN  captures the vari -
ability in its predictions.
4.8  COMMON MISTAKES AND TROUBLESHOOTING TIPS
4.8.1   u nder Standing  proBaBility diStriBution S
 •Mistake:  Confusing discrete and continuous distributions.
 •Tip: Remember that discrete distributions deal with countable outcomes (e.g., number of  
heads in coin flips), while continuous distributions handle outcomes over a range (e.g., height  
of individuals).
FIGURE 4.15  Predictive mean and actual data points of a BNN on synthetic data. 
  
  

--- PDF PAGE 143 ---
130 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
 •Mistake:  Misinterpreting the properties of distributions (e.g., thinking all data are normally 
distributed).
 •Tip: Always check the data and select the appropriate distribution. For example, a Poisson 
distribution can model the number of events occurring in a fixed interval.
4.8.2   a pplying  proBaBility diStriBution S
 •Mistake:  Using inappropriate distributions for the data type.
 •Tip: Match your data characteristics to the distribution. For instance, the binomial distribu -
tion can be used for binary outcomes, and the normal distribution can be used for continuous, 
symmetric data.
4.8.3   o verfitting  and underfitting
 •Mistake:  Ignoring signs of overfitting and underfitting in model performance.
 •Tip: Monitor model performance on both training and validation sets. High training accuracy but 
low validation accuracy indicates overfitting. Low accuracy on both sets suggests underfitting.
 •Mistake:  Not using regularization techniques to combat overfitting.
 •Tip: To penalize model complexity, Implement regularization methods like L1/ L2 regulariza -
tion, dropout, or Bayesian priors.
4.8.4   BayeSian neural  network S
 •Mistake:  Treating BNNs like traditional NNs without considering uncertainty.
 •Tip: Embrace the probabilistic nature of BNNs . Use the posterior distributions of weights to 
gauge uncertainty in predictions, which is crucial for making informed decisions.
4.8.5   m oment S in StatiSticS
 •Mistake:  Misinterpreting the significance of higher-  order moments like skewness and kurtosis.
 •Tip: Use skewness to understand asymmetry in data and kurtosis to assess tail heaviness. 
These moments provide deeper insights into data distribution beyond mean and variance.
 •Mistake:  Relying solely on mean and variance for data analysis.
 •Tip: Consider higher-  order moments when data exhibits skewness or heavy tails. This can pre -
vent misinterpretation of data characteristics and improve model fitting.
4.8.6   Sampling  method S
 •Mistake:  Not ensuring randomness in sampling.
 •Tip: Implement truly random sampling methods to avoid bias. For systematic sampling, ensure 
that the population does not have periodic patterns that could bias results.
 •Mistake:  Ignoring the need for stratified sampling in heterogeneous populations.
 •Tip: Use stratified sampling to ensure all population subgroups are adequately represented, 
improving the precision of estimates.
4.8.7   BayeSian StatiSticS
 •Mistake:  Choosing inappropriate priors in Bayesian models.
 •Tip: Select priors that reflect prior knowledge or are non-  informative when little prior infor -
mation is available. Sensitivity analysis can help understand the impact of different priors on 
posterior distributions. 
 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 144 ---
131 Probability Theory and Statistics
4.9  REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. How do BNNs handle uncertainty differently from traditional NNs? Discuss the role of prob -
ability distributions in BNNs .
2. Explain the concepts of overfitting and underfitting in the context of statistical modeling. 
What are some methods used to prevent these issues in machine learning models?
3. Define and explain the importance of the following terms in the context of probability 
distributions: mean, variance, skewness, kurtosis.
4. What is Bayes’ theorem, and how is it applied to Bayesian statistics? Provide a simple 
example to illustrate its use.
5. Discuss how model complexity affects the performance of a machine learning model. How 
do Bayesian statistics help manage model complexity?
6. Compare and contrast the three sampling methods discussed in the chapter. Which method 
would you choose for a given scenario involving a large, heterogeneous population, and 
why?
7. Provide an example of a real-  world application where the statistical principles discussed in 
this chapter can be applied. How do these principles improve the prediction accuracy or reli -
ability of the model?
8. What are regularization techniques, and how do they relate to Bayesian statistics? Explain 
how these techniques help in handling overfitting.
9. How does understanding the uncertainty in model predictions benefit the deployment of 
machine learning models in sensitive areas like healthcare or autonomous driving?
10. How do prior and posterior distributions differ in Bayesian statistics? Discuss their roles in 
updating beliefs as new data becomes available and provide an example of how this concept 
is applied in machine learning.
4.10  PROGRAMMING QUESTIONS
4.10.1   e aSy
Implement a program that generates a set of data points following a normal distribution.
1. Use a random number generator to create a set of data points that follow a normal distribu -
tion with a specified mean and standard deviation.
2. Calculate the theoretical PDF  of the normal distribution using the specified mean and 
standard deviation.
4.10.2   m edium
Implement Bayesian linear regression to predict a dependent variable based on an independent 
variable.
1. Create a dataset with an independent variable, x, and a dependent variable, y, with added 
Gaussian noise.
2. Specify the Bayesian linear regression model with priors for the weights and noise.
3. Use a Bayesian inference method to estimate the posterior distributions of the weights.
4. Generate predictions for new data points and compute credible intervals for the 
predictions. 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 145 ---
132 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
4.10.3   h ard
Implement variational inference for a BNN to perform classification on a synthetic dataset.
1. Create a synthetic dataset for a binary classification problem with clear decision boundaries.
2. Specify the architecture of the BNN  using variational inference methods (e.g., Bayes by 
Backprop or Flipout layers in TensorFlow Probability).
3. Train the BNN on the synthetic dataset using an appropriate optimizer and loss function.
4. Perform variational inference to estimate the posterior distributions of the weights.
5. Generate predictions for a grid of points covering the input space. Compute the uncertainty 
in the predictions for each point in the grid.  

--- PDF PAGE 146 ---
133 DOI: 10.1201/9781032690742-55 Optimization Theory
5.1  INTRODUCTION
Optimization theory is a key part of mathematics and applied sciences, and it takes a deep look 
into how we make decisions. At its core, optimization is about finding the best solution from many 
possible options. It’s focused on accuracy, blending logic and function to achieve the most effective 
results. Whenever we seek knowledge or try to solve a problem, we’re quietly pursuing perfection, 
and optimization guides us on this journey toward excellence. From dividing up resources in an 
economy to improving the algorithms that run our digital world, the search for the best choice is 
always ongoing. Optimization theory provides the tools and viewpoints we need to navigate this 
area, offering solutions and a deeper understanding of how we reach them. This chapter explores 
some of the most popular optimization methods in deep learning.
5.2  OPTIMIZATION THEORY
Optimization theory is basically about making choices and picking the best option from a set of 
available alternatives based on specific, measurable criteria. At its core, it sheds light on the prin -
ciple of selection: when faced with many options, how do we identify the most suitable or advan -
tageous one? This field provides systematic and analytical methods to determine the “best” choice, 
where “best” could mean minimizing costs, maximizing efficiency, reducing waste, or achieving 
any other measurable goal. For example, imagine a business evaluating different marketing strat -
egies to find the most cost-  effective one, an engineer choosing the most durable material for a new 
design, or a traveler planning the quickest route to their destination. Constraints are an essential 
part of optimization problems. They define the feasible solutions and ensure that these solutions are 
practical and applicable to real-  world scenarios. Constraints limit the decision variables and set the 
boundaries for the optimal solution. They are restrictions or limitations placed on decision variables 
and can be equality constraints (e.g., x +  y =  10) or inequality constraints (e.g., x +  y ≤ 10). These 
constraints shape the feasible region in the decision variable space, within which the optimal solu -
tion must be found. There are different types of constraints:
 •Equality constraints  must be satisfied exactly, such as the total weight of items in a knapsack 
problem.
 •Inequality constraints  set an upper or lower limit, like a budget constraint where total costs 
must not exceed a specific value.
 •Bound constraints  directly limit the range of decision variables, such as a percentage that 
must be between 0 and 100. 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 147 ---
134 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
Feasible solutions are those that meet all the constraints, while infeasible solutions violate one  
or more constraints. Active constraints are those that, if slightly changed, would alter the optimal  
solution. Binding constraints are specific inequality constraints that are exactly met at the optimal  
solution and directly influence it. Many optimization algorithms are initially designed for problems  
without constraints. However, there are several effective methods to handle constraints. Penalty  
methods convert a constrained problem into an unconstrained one by adding penalties to the  
objective function for any violations of the constraints.
Figure 5.1  features two primary constraint lines: the green line represents the inequality xx124+≤,    
while the orange line corresponds to 2 612xx+≤ . These lines present the boundaries within which 
the variables x1 and x2 must lie to satisfy both constraints simultaneously. The area where these 
constraints overlap is a shaded area, highlighting the feasible region where potential solutions exist. 
At the core of this feasible region lies the optimal solution, marked prominently with a large purple 
scatter point. This point, situated at the coordinates ( x1, x2), represents the values of x1 and x2 that 
maximize the objective function 3 x1 +  2x2 while adhering to the defined constraints.
5.3  TYPES OF OPTIMIZATIONS
5.3.1   l inear optimization
Linear optimization, also known as linear programming, focuses on finding the best outcome, like 
maximizing profit or minimizing cost, in models where all relationships are linear. The main com -
ponent is the objective function that you want to optimize. For example, if you’re trying to maximize 
profit from selling two products, A and B, the objective function could be written as Pa Ab B=+ , 
where a and b represent the profit per unit of products A and B, respectively. In linear optimization, 
FIGURE 5.1  Feasible region and constraints in linear programming. 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 148 ---
135 Optimization Theory
you have limits called constraints, which are expressed as linear equations or inequalities. Using 
the example above, constraints might include limitations on available resources like raw materials 
or labor, represented in linear terms. These constraints define the set of all feasible solutions that 
meet the requirements. The optimal solution is the one that maximizes or minimizes the objective 
function within this feasible set. In two-  dimensional cases, this optimal point is often found at a 
vertex of the feasible polygon, the corner points of the area defined by the constraints. The sim -
plex method is the most recognized technique for solving linear optimization problems, but other 
methods, like interior point methods, are also effective, especially in specific situations. However, 
linear optimization assumes that both the objective function and the constraints are linear, which 
might not be true in more complex, real-  world scenarios. Nonetheless, some non-  linear problems 
can be approximated as linear to make use of linear optimization methods, broadening their applic -
ability. The general form of a linear optimization problem is:
 Maximizeo r minimizeZc xc xc xnn=++…+11 22 
Subject to:
 ax ax ax bnn11 11 22 11++ …+ ≤  
 ax ax ax bnn21 12 22 22++ …+ ≤  
 xx xn120 ,,,…≥ 
Suppose a company produces two products, A and B, with profit margins of $3 per unit for product 
A and $4 per unit for product B. The objective function for maximizing profit is:
 MaximizePA B=+34  
Subject to the following constraints: A +  2B ≤ 14 (raw material constraint), 3A +  B ≤ 18 (labor con -
straint), and A, B  ≥ 0.
Figure 5.2  features two primary constraint lines: the light blue line represents the inequality 
A B+≤21 4 , while the blue line corresponds to A B+≤18 . These lines present the boundaries within 
which the variables A and B must reside to satisfy both constraints simultaneously. The intersection 
of these constraints forms the vertices of the feasible region, which is shaded to visually demarcate 
the area where potential solutions lie. At the core of this feasible region is the optimal solution, 
marked prominently with a large green point. This point, situated at approximately (4, 3), represents 
the values of A and B which maximize the objective function P =  3A +  4B while adhering to the 
defined constraints. Additionally, the red dashed line represents the objective function at its optimal 
value, P =  24, illustrating the level curve of the objective function that intersects the feasible region 
at the optimal point. This line serves as a visual cue, demonstrating how the objective function 
interacts with the constraints to determine the optimal solution.
5.3.2   n on- linear  optimization
Non-  linear optimization deals with situations where the objective function, the constraints, or both  
involve non-  linear relationships. Unlike linear relationships, which are represented by straight lines  
or flat surfaces, non-  linear interactions add complexity, making these problems more challenging  
and more reflective of real-  world dynamics. This flexibility is crucial in many scientific and indus -
trial applications because it models complex relationships. In non-  linear optimization, the objective  
function includes non-  linear expressions of the decision variables. For example, consider the   
 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 149 ---
136 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
function PA BA B=+ −2334 , where the goal is to maximize or minimize P. This creates a dynamic  
landscape of possible solutions, making the optimization process more complicated. Constraints can  
also be non-  linear, such as A B229+≤, which represents a circular boundary in a two-  dimensional  
space for variables A and B. This geometric constraint shapes the feasible solution space into forms  
that are not just flat or polyhedral. The solution techniques include:
(a) Gradient-  Based Methods:  These include gradient descent, Newton’s method, and quasi-  
Newton methods, which utilize derivatives to guide the optimization process.
(b) Direct Search Methods:  For instance, the Nelder–  Mead method operates without derivative 
information and is suitable for problems where derivatives are infeasible to calculate.
(c) Evolutionary and Genetic Algorithms:  Inspired by natural selection, these methods use 
heuristic approaches to explore the solution space, which is especially useful in complex 
landscapes.
A general non-  linear optimization problem can be formulated as:
 Maximizeo r minimizefx xxn12,,,… ()  
Subject to:
 gx xx bg xx xb gx xx bnn mn m 11 21 21 22 12,,, , ,,, ,, ,,,… () ≤… () ≤… … () ≤ 
FIGURE 5.2  Linear optimization: feasible region and objective function. 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 150 ---
137 Optimization Theory
In this case, f(x1, x2) represents the non-  linear objective function, and g(x1, x2) represents the non-  
linear constraints, shaping the feasible region. Techniques like gradient descent would be used to find 
optimal solutions. Suppose you aim to maximize the non-  linear objective function PA BAB,()=+22,   
subject to the non-  linear constraint A B229+≤, which represents a circular boundary with a radius 
of 3. The feasible solution space is the interior of this circle, and the maximum value of P occurs at 
the boundary where PA BA B=+ −2334 , producing a maximum value of P(3, 0)=  9.
Figure 5.3  features a vibrant contour map of the objective function PA BA B=+ −2334 , rendered 
using the perceptually uniform colormap. Central to the visualization is the constraint A B229+≤
, depicted as a prominent dashed black circle with a radius of 3. This boundary defines the feasible 
region in which optimization must occur. The area inside the circle, where both constraints are sat -
isfied, is subtly highlighted with a semitransparent overlay of the same colormap, reinforcing the 
feasible region’s significance without overwhelming the objective function’s contours. Additionally, 
a specific point within the feasible region, such as (1, 1), is marked with a large red scatter point.
5.3.3   integer  optimization
Integer optimization (IO), or integer programming (IP), focuses on optimization problems where  
some or all decision variables must assume integer values. This requirement arises when fractional  
solutions are impractical, such as determining the number of items to produce, personnel assignments,  
or scheduling tasks. IO is critical for problems demanding discrete solutions, presenting unique  
challenges distinct from those of continuous optimization. The types of IO are:
FIGURE 5.3  Non-  linear optimization with constraints.   

--- PDF PAGE 151 ---
138 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
(a) Pure Integer Programming (PIP):  All decision variables are integers.
(b) Mixed Integer Programming (MIP):  Combines integer and continuous variables, addressing 
a more complete range of practical scenarios.
(c) Binary Integer Programming (BIP):  Decision variables are binary (0 or 1), ideal for problems 
involving binary decisions like turning a process on or off.
In some optimization problems, the variables are required to be whole numbers (integers). The 
objective function, which we aim to maximize or minimize, can be linear or non-  linear, leading to 
situations known as linear IP or non-  linear IP. Similarly, the constraints in these problems can be linear 
or non-  linear and may also demand that the variables be integers. Several techniques are employed to 
solve these IP problems. One method is branch and bound (B&B), which involves branching on the 
fractional parts of variables. This technique systematically explores different possible solutions and 
uses upper and lower bounds to reduce the search space, making it easier to find the optimal integer 
solution. Another approach is cutting plane method, which add extra constraints called cutting planes 
to the problem. These methods derive valid inequalities to eliminate fractional solutions, guiding the 
search toward integer solutions. Additionally, heuristic methods like rounding or diving provide quick 
ways to find feasible integer solutions. While these methods are faster, they may not always find the 
best possible solution but offer an acceptable one. A general IO problem can be formulated as:
 Maximizeo r minimizeZc xc xc xnn=++…+11 22 
Subject to:
 ax ax ax bx xxnn n11 11 22 11 12++ …+ ≤… ∈, ,,,  
This formulation captures the requirement that decision variables must be integers, and methods 
like B&B or cutting plane methods are used to solve these problems. Suppose a company needs 
to produce tables and chairs. The decision variables are the number of tables T and chairs C to 
produce. The profit is given by the linear objective function Z TC=+20 15 , and the constraint is 
that the total production cannot exceed 100 units T C+≤100 . As fractional tables or chairs cannot 
be produced, T and C must be integers. The IO problems are classified as NP-  hard, meaning the 
computational difficulty can scale exponentially with problem size. The discrete nature of the solu -
tion space restricts the use of gradient-  based optimization methods that are effective in continuous 
scenarios. Due to their complexity, IO problems often necessitate specialized computational tools.
Figure 5.4  illustrates the feasible region defined by the constraint A +  B ≤ 12 and highlights the 
optimal solution that maximizes the objective function P =  3A +  2B. The plot features a grid of 
discrete points where both A and B range from 0 to 12, representing all possible combinations of 
these variables. The feasible solutions are depicted using a scatter plot with square markers, colored 
according to their corresponding objective function values P. The semitransparent light gray shading 
delineates the feasible region where the constraint A +  B ≤ 12 is satisfied, providing a boundary 
that confines the optimization problem’s solution space. At the heart of the feasible region lies the 
optimal solution, marked prominently with a large golden-  yellow scatter point. This point represents 
the values of A and B that maximize the objective function P while adhering to the constraint.
5.3.4   c onvex  optimization
Convex optimization is a specialized area within optimization where both the objective function and 
the constraints are convex. This property greatly simplifies the optimization process because any 
local minimum is also a global minimum, eliminating the uncertainty often found in non-  convex 
optimization. A function f is considered convex over an interval I if, for any two points x1 and x2 in 
I and any λ in the interval [0, 1], the following inequality holds: 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 152 ---
139 Optimization Theory
 f xx fx fxλλ λλ12 1211+−( ) () ≤()+−( )() 
Graphically, this means that the line segment between any two points on the graph of the function 
lies above or on the graph itself. A set S is convex if, for every pair of points x1 and x2 in S and 
any λ in the interval [0, 1], the point λλxx121+−( ) also belongs to S. This ensures that the 
entire line segment between any two points in S is contained within S. Convex optimization 
problems have several key features. First, if a solution exists, it is unique and globally optimal. 
Unlike non-  convex problems, convex optimization does not have local optima that are not global. 
Additionally, the intersection of all constraints forms a convex feasible set, which simplifies 
the search for the optimal solution. Various techniques are used to solve convex optimization 
problems. Gradient descent is an iterative method that moves in the direction of the steepest 
decrease of the function. Interior point methods explore the inside of the feasible set to find the 
optimal solution. Subgradient and proximal methods are particularly useful for convex optimiza -
tion problems that are not smooth. Despite their advantages, convex optimization problems can 
present challenges. Finding the global optimum might be computationally demanding, especially 
in high-  dimensional spaces. Moreover, not all real-  world problems are convex, and transforming 
non- convex problems into convex ones can be limiting and impractical. A general convex opti -
mization problem can be formulated as:
 Minimizefx () 
FIGURE 5.4  Integer optimization. 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 153 ---
140 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
Subject to:
 gx ixi()≤∀ ∈0,  
where:
 •f(x) is a convex function,
 •gi(x) represents convex constraints, and
 •C is a convex set.
This ensures that any local minimum is also a global minimum, and techniques like gradient descent 
or interior point can efficiently solve such problems. Consider the convex function f(x) =  x2 +  4x +  
4, which has a global minimum at x =  −2. The objective is to minimize this function, subject to the 
constraint x ≥ −3. As f(x) is convex and the constraint forms a convex set, the optimal solution is 
x =  −2, where the function achieves its minimum value of 0.
In Figure 5.5 , the function f xx()=2 is plotted as a smooth curve. This quadratic function 
represents a simple convex shape, making it suitable for demonstrating the gradient descent method. 
The gradient descent process begins at the starting point, marked by the green dot, located on the 
right side of the function. From here, gradient descent iteratively updates the value of x to minimize 
f(x). At each step, the algorithm moves in the direction of the negative gradient (the slope of the 
function at the current point), adjusting x to decrease the function value. These steps are represented 
by the blue dots along the curve. Each dot shows a position where the algorithm evaluates and 
updates the function value, gradually moving toward the minimum. As the algorithm approaches 
FIGURE 5.5  Convex optimization using gradient descent on f xx()=2.
   

--- PDF PAGE 154 ---
141 Optimization Theory
the minimum point, highlighted in yellow, the steps become smaller. This behavior illustrates that 
as the gradient (slope) decreases near the minimum, the updates become less significant, allowing 
the algorithm to converge precisely at the minimum. The minimum of f xx()=2 occurs at x =  0, 
where the function value is also zero. The shaded area under the curve provides visual emphasis on 
the function’s domain, while the red dashed line shows the trajectory of the algorithm’s updates, 
highlighting how it progressively converges toward the minimum.
5.3.5   c omBinatorial  optimization
Combinatorial optimization is an important field within optimization that deals with problems 
in discrete and combinatorial settings, such as finding the shortest path in a network or graph. It 
addresses optimization challenges where the solution space consists of distinct, countable options, 
and the number of possible solutions can be immense, often increasing exponentially as the problem 
grows larger. A key feature of combinatorial optimization is the discrete nature of its solution space, 
meaning solutions are separate and countable. As the size of the problem increases, the complexity 
and the number of potential solutions expand dramatically. These problems often involve selecting 
the best combination or sequence of elements from a set, which is a defining characteristic of this 
type of optimization. Common examples of combinatorial optimization problems include the trav -
eling salesman problem (TSP), where the objective is to find the shortest possible route that visits 
each city exactly once and returns to the starting point. Another example is graph coloring, where 
colors are assigned to the vertices of a graph so that no two adjacent vertices share the same color, 
aiming to use the fewest colors possible. Bin packing involves efficiently packing objects of different 
sizes into the smallest number of bins. Various techniques are used to solve combinatorial optimiza -
tion problems. Exact algorithms, such as B&B or the Hungarian algorithm, guarantee an optimal 
solution but are often very computationally intensive. Heuristic algorithms, like the greedy method 
or hill climbing, aim to find a good solution quickly, though they do not guarantee the best pos -
sible solution. Metaheuristic algorithms, such as genetic algorithms or ant colony optimization, are 
higher-  level strategies that guide simpler heuristics toward better solutions. The main challenges in 
combinatorial optimization include the NP-  hard nature of many of these problems, meaning there is 
no known efficient (polynomial-  time) solution, and it is uncertain if one exists. Additionally, the vast 
size of the solution space makes exhaustive searches impractical except for the smallest problems.
Figure 5.6  showcases an example of the TSP, which is a classic optimization problem where the 
objective is to determine the shortest possible route that visits each city exactly once and returns to 
the starting point. The figure illustrates five cities, labeled A, B, C, D, and E, positioned on a 2D 
coordinate plane. Each city is marked with a distinct shape and color to enhance clarity. The optimal 
path connecting these cities is shown by the dark line traversing from one city to the next. The total 
length of this optimal route is indicated in the legend as 20.06 units, representing the shortest path 
that satisfies the TSP criteria for these specific cities. The path begins at city A (blue circle), moves 
through city B (orange star), then continues to city E (purple plus), city C (green triangle), and 
finally reaches city D (red diamond) before looping back to city A.
The objective function for the TSP is:
 Minimize
in
iidxx
=+ ∑()
11,  
where:
 •xi is the ith city in the tour,
 •d(xi, xi+ 1) represents the distance between cities xi and xi+ 1, and
 •the solution space consists of all possible permutations of city visits, making the problem 
combinatorial. 
  

--- PDF PAGE 155 ---
142 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
This formulation represents the challenge of finding the optimal sequence of cities with an enormous  
solution space, often tackled using exact or heuristic methods. Consider the TSP with five cities.  
The goal is to find the shortest route that visits each city exactly once and returns to the starting city.  
If there are five cities, there are 120 possible routes (since 5! =   120). Using an exact algorithm like  
B&B, the shortest route can be found by systematically evaluating and pruning possible routes.
5.3.6  g radient  deScent
Gradient descent is a foundational optimization technique in machine learning, essential for solving 
complex problems where analytical solutions are either unavailable or computationally prohibitive. 
This iterative method is adept at navigating multi-  dimensional data landscapes to find the local min -
imum of a function, typically a loss function in machine learning contexts. The primary objective 
of gradient descent is to minimize the loss function, which measures the discrepancy between the 
predicted outputs of a model and the actual outcomes. The principle behind gradient descent is 
analogous to descending a hill. Mathematically, this is achieved by moving in the direction opposite 
to the function’s gradient at the current point, which points toward the steepest ascent. Let us go to 
the detailed mechanics of it:
 •Gradient:  For a function f x(), where x is a vector of parameters, the gradient ∇()fx is a 
vector of partial derivatives. It indicates the direction and rate of the steepest increase.
FIGURE 5.6  Traveling salesman problem. 
  

--- PDF PAGE 156 ---
143 Optimization Theory
 •Update Rule:  The parameter vector x is updated iteratively using the rule: xx fxxnewo ld old=− ∇ () α  
where α is the learning rate.
 •Convergence:  Properly tuning the learning rate, and under certain conditions (e.g., con -
vexity of the function), gradient descent can converge to the global minimum. In non-  convex 
scenarios, it may settle at a local minimum or a saddle point.
Gradient descent comes in several variations, each designed to enhance efficiency, stability, or con -
vergence when solving optimization problems. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) uses a single 
randomly selected data point to estimate the gradient, which speeds up each iteration and can help 
avoid getting stuck in local minima. Mini-  batch gradient descent uses a small subset of data to com -
pute the gradient, offering a middle ground between the speed of SGD and the stability of using 
the full dataset. The momentum method adds a portion of the previous update to the current step. 
This approach aims to accelerate convergence and reduce oscillations, especially in areas where the 
loss function changes sharply. Adaptive learning rate methods, like Adagrad, RMSprop, and Adam, 
adjust the learning rate based on previous gradients. This allows for more precise convergence and 
improved stability during training. Setting the learning rate too high can cause the algorithm to 
diverge, while setting it too low might lead to slow convergence or getting stuck in suboptimal points. 
With non-  convex functions, there’s a risk of converging to local minima or saddle points instead of 
the global minimum. As gradient descent is sensitive to the scale of the features, normalizing or 
standardizing them is often necessary for effective optimization. Despite these challenges, gradient 
descent remains a fundamental tool in optimization, especially in machine learning. It supports a 
wide range of applications, from simple regression tasks to complex deep learning algorithms. Its 
flexibility and efficiency make it indispensable for researchers and practitioners.
The updated rule for gradient descent is given by:
 θ θα θnewo ld=− ∇ ()J 
where:
 •θ is the parameter vector,
 •α is the learning rate, and
 •∇∇J(θ) is the gradient of the cost function with respect to θ.
This iterative process continues until the gradient converges, minimizing the loss function and 
finding the optimal parameters for the model. Suppose you are training a linear regression model 
to predict house prices. The cost function Jmhx yiiθθ ()=∑ ()−1
22()  needs to be minimized, where 
θ represents the model parameters. Let the initial value of θ =  0.5, and the gradient at this point be 
calculated as ∇∇J(θ) =  1.2. Using a learning rate α =  0.01, the update rule would adjust θ as follows:
 θ θα θnew=− ∇ ()=− ×= J 05 00 11 20 488 .. ..  
Figure 5.7  shows the trajectory of gradient descent on the quadratic function f(x) =   x2. The plot starts 
with a high initial value (the “Starting Point”) and iteratively updates based on the gradient, moving 
toward the function’s minimum. The objective is to reach the lowest point of the function, which is 
at x =  0, also marked as the “Final Point.” Each red dashed line and crimson scatter point represents 
a step in the gradient descent process, with every fifth step labeled for clarity. The goal is to illus -
trate how the gradient descent algorithm takes steps proportional to the negative of the gradient to 
minimize the function. The plot helps visualize the optimization process, showing how the gradient 
descent path narrows down towards the optimal solution. 
  

--- PDF PAGE 157 ---
144 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
FIGURE 5.7  Gradient descent on a quadratic function.
  newgenrtpdf

--- PDF PAGE 158 ---
145 Optimization Theory
5.3.7   Stocha Stic optimization
Stochastic optimization is a field that deals with problems under uncertainty. In these cases, some 
parts of the model, such as parameters, constraints, or the objective function, include random 
variables. This uncertainty makes the optimization process more complex but also more reflective 
of real-  world situations. The goal in stochastic optimization is often to find a feasible and optimal 
solution on average or with a high probability rather than one that is deterministically optimal. This 
approach is crucial for handling scenarios where exact information about the model is unavailable 
or when the system is subject to random fluctuations and noise. Several techniques are used in sto -
chastic optimization. One method is sample average approximation (SAA), which involves solving 
the problem multiple times using different samples from the probability distributions of the uncer -
tain parameters and then averaging the results. Another technique is SGD, an extension of the trad -
itional gradient descent method that uses a randomly selected subset of data, called a mini-  batch, 
to perform each update. This method is commonly used in machine learning for training models on 
large datasets. Monte Carlo simulation is also employed to assess the impact of risk and uncertainty 
in prediction and forecasting models by simulating a wide range of possible outcomes. Stochastic 
optimization faces several challenges. The inherent uncertainty in these problems makes solutions 
computationally complex and difficult to obtain. The quality of the solutions heavily depends on the 
quality and quantity of the data available about the uncertainties involved, leading to data depend -
ency issues. Scalability becomes a concern as the size of the data and the number of uncertain 
parameters increase, requiring significantly more computational resources to find a solution effi -
ciently. Despite these challenges, stochastic optimization is increasingly important in industries 
and sectors where uncertainty is a significant factor. By incorporating randomness directly into 
the decision-  making process, organizations can develop strategies that are not only theoretically 
optimal but also practical and robust against real-  world variability and unpredictability. This opti -
mization approach improves decision-  making by providing frameworks that anticipate and effect -
ively manage the inherent uncertainties of various operational environments. The general form of a 
stochastic optimization problem is:
 Minimizefx,ξ()  
where:
 •f(x, ξ) is the objective function,
 •ξ represents random variables (uncertainties), and
 • is the expectation over the random variables.
Techniques such as SAA estimate the objective by averaging over several samples of ξ, helping 
optimize decisions under uncertainty. Suppose a company wants to optimize its inventory man -
agement under uncertain demand. Using SGD, they aim to minimize the cost function J(θ), where 
θ represents the reorder point. With demand data subject to randomness, they update the reorder 
point iteratively using small mini-  batches of demand data. If the gradient estimate at iteration 1 is 
∇∇J(θ) =  0.6 and the learning rate is α =  0.05, the updated reorder point would be:
 θ θα θθnewo ld=− ∇ ()=− ×J00 50 6 ..  
Figure 5.8 , illustrates the process of SGD for optimizing the objective function f xx()=+2noise .   
The blue line represents the noisy objective function, f xx()=+2noise , which includes random -
ness, making the curve less smooth. The path of SGD is traced with red dashed lines, highlighting 
the steps taken from the starting point to the final point. The green dot marks the starting point of  
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 159 ---
146 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
FIGURE 5.8  Stochastic gradient descent.
  newgenrtpdf

--- PDF PAGE 160 ---
147 Optimization Theory
x =  10, where the optimization process begins. The orange dot indicates the final point after 30 
iterations, showing where the algorithm has converged. Red dots along the dashed line indicate the 
positions visited by SGD at each iteration. To avoid clutter, every fifth step is annotated with “Step 
X”, where X is the iteration number, showing the algorithm’s progression.
5.3.8   Simplex  method
The Simplex method is a fundamental algorithm in linear optimization, widely used to solve linear 
programming problems. In linear programming, the primary objective is to maximize or minimize 
a linear function while satisfying a set of linear equality or inequality constraints. These constraints 
define the feasible region, which is typically a polyhedron or polytope where the solution must lie. 
If an optimal solution exists, it will be found at one of the vertices (corner points) of this feasible 
region. The algorithm starts at a vertex of the feasible region and moves from one vertex to another, 
checking at each step whether the move improves the value of the objective function. This process 
continues until it reaches a vertex where no adjacent vertex offers a better value, indicating that the 
optimal solution has been found. The Simplex method is generally very efficient in practice, even 
though its worst-  case time complexity can be exponential. This means that while it could theoretic -
ally take a very long time for some problems, it usually performs exceptionally well in real-  world 
scenarios. Sometimes, the method might cycle between the same vertices without making progress. 
To prevent this, strategies like Bland’s Rule are used to ensure that the algorithm moves toward a 
solution without getting stuck in a loop. Every linear programming problem has a corresponding 
dual problem. Understanding the relationship between the original (primal) problem and its dual can 
provide deeper insights and can sometimes simplify finding the solution. The Simplex method has 
been adapted into various forms to handle more complex situations, such as the Two-  Phase Simplex 
method and the Revised Simplex method. While the Simplex method remains a dominant technique 
in linear programming, it faces competition from interior-  point methods, which can be more suit -
able for solving very large-  scale linear programming problems. The linear programming problem 
in standard form is:
 MaximizeZc xc xc xnn=++…+11 22 
Subject to:
 Axb x≤≥,0  
where:
 •c ccn12,,,…  are the coefficients of the objective function,
 •A is the matrix of constraint coefficients,
 •x is the vector of decision variables, and
 •b is the vector of constraint bounds.
This formulation represents the optimization problem, where the Simplex method navigates the 
feasible region defined by the constraints to find the optimal solution. Consider a linear program -
ming problem to maximize the objective function Z =  3x1 +  2x2, subject to the constraints:
 xx xx xx12 12 1242 60+≤ +≤ ≥,, ,  
The Simplex method starts at one vertex of the feasible region, say (0, 0), and iteratively moves 
to adjacent vertices, checking for improvement in the objective function. The method eventually 
reaches the optimal solution at x1 =  2, where Z =  10. 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 161 ---
148 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
Figure 5.9  demonstrates the application of the Simplex method in solving a linear programming 
problem. The objective is to find the optimal solution that maximizes or minimizes a linear  
objective function subject to constraints. In this illustration, the constraints are represented by the  
lines: xx124+≤ (blue line) and 2612xx+≤  (green line). These constraints define the feasible  
region, shaded in light gray. The feasible region is the set of all points that satisfy both inequalities  
simultaneously, and it represents all possible solutions to the linear programming problem. The  
Simplex path is marked in brown and shows the sequence of steps taken by the Simplex algorithm  
as it moves from one vertex of the feasible region to another, improving the objective function  
value at each step. The path culminates at the optimal point (2, 2), highlighted in yellow, which  
represents the optimal solution that maximizes (or minimizes) the objective function under the  
given constraints.
5.3.9   l agrangian  multiplier S
Lagrange multipliers are a robust optimization method used to find a function’s local maxima 
and minima subject to equality constraints. Named after Joseph-  Louis Lagrange, this technique 
transforms constrained optimization problems into unconstrained ones, facilitating their solu -
tion. Consider the problem of finding the extremum (maximum or minimum) of a function/  
subject to a constraint gx xxn120 ,,,… () =. The method introduces an auxiliary variable, λ (the 
Lagrange multiplier), to incorporate the constraint into the objective function. The Lagrangian, 
L, is formulated as:
 xx xf xx xg xx xnn n12 12 12,,,, ,,, ,,,… () =…() +…() λλ  
FIGURE 5.9  Simplex method. 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 162 ---
149 Optimization Theory
To find the extremum of f subject to g, we solve for the points where the gradient of the Lagrangian 
is zero:
 ∇= ∇+∇=Lf g λ 0 
This results in a system of equations that, when solved, provide the values of the variables and 
the Lagrange multiplier. The Lagrange multiplier, has a meaningful interpretation. Generally, it 
measures the rate of change in the maximum or minimum value of the objective function as the 
constraint varies. Lagrange multipliers are applied across various fields. In economics, they are 
used for utility maximization and cost minimization problems. In machine learning, algorithms 
like support vector machines use Lagrange multipliers for optimization with constraints. While 
robust, Lagrange multipliers are primarily suited for equality constraints. For problems involving 
inequality constraints, methods like the Karush–  Kuhn–  Tucker (KKT) conditions are more appro -
priate. Consider maximizing the function f(x, y) =   xy, subject to the constraint x +  y =  10. Using the 
Lagrange multiplier λ, we form the Lagrangian:
 xy xy xy,, λλ( )=+ −− ( ) 10  
To find the extremum, we take the partial derivatives with respect to x, y, and λ and set them equal 
to zero:
 ∂
∂=−=∂
∂=−=∂
∂=− −=
xyyxx y λλλ00 10 0 ,,  
Solving this system yields x =  y =  5, giving the maximum value of f(x, y)  =  25. The Lagrange multi -
plier method transforms a constrained optimization problem into an unconstrained one by introdu -
cing a new variable λ. The Lagrangian is defined as:
 xf xg xc ,λλ()=()+ ()−  
where:
 •f(x) is the objective function,
 •g(x) =  c is the constraint,
 •λ is the Lagrange multiplier.
The solution is found by solving the system of equations obtained from setting the gradients of the 
Lagrangian to zero:
 ∇()=x,λ 0 
Figure 5.10  displays a contour plot of the function f(x, y)=   xy, with contour lines representing levels 
of constant function values. The color gradient indicates the objective function’s values, transitioning 
from blue (lower values) to red (higher values), giving a visual sense of how f(x, y)  changes across 
the plane. The dashed blue circle represents the constraint xy221+=, which defines the feasible 
region for this optimization problem. This constraint forms a circle of radius 1 centered at the origin, 
encompassing all points that satisfy the equation. The red dots marked as optimal points (0.71, 0.71 
and −0.71, −0.71) indicate where the function reaches its maximum and minimum values within the 
constrained region. These points are located on the circle where the product xy is maximized and 
minimized, showing how the constraint influences the objective function’s optimization. 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 163 ---
150 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
5.3.10  Branch  and Bound  and cutting  plane method S
B&B and cutting plane methods are crucial algorithms for solving optimization problems, particu -
larly combinatorial and IP challenges. B&B is a systematic method for exploring possible solutions 
within a tree structure. The process begins with branching, where the main problem is divided 
into smaller subproblems, creating branches in a solution tree. In bounding, each subproblem is 
evaluated by calculating a bound, and if this bound is better than the current best solution, the 
subproblem is explored further; otherwise, it is discarded. Pruning occurs when subproblems that 
cannot improve upon the best-  known solution are eliminated, enhancing efficiency by reducing 
unnecessary calculations. The cutting plane methods iteratively solve IP problems by refining the 
feasible region. Here are its general steps:
(a) Starting Solution:  Start by solving the problem’s linear programming relaxation, ignoring 
integer constraints.
FIGURE 5.10  Optimization with constraints. 
  

--- PDF PAGE 164 ---
151 Optimization Theory
(b) Check & Cut:  Verify if the solution meets integer constraints. If not, a cut (linear inequality) 
is added to exclude the current fractional solution while retaining feasible integer points.
(c) Iterate:  Repeat until an acceptable integer solution is found or proven that none exists.
The B&B method explores a solution tree, where each subproblem is a branch, and solutions are 
bounded. The cutting plane method iterates by adding constraints to refine the feasible region. For 
the cutting plane method, starting from a linear relaxation:
MaximizeZc xc x=+11 22 Subject to: Axb x≤≥,0
If the solution is not integer, add a cut (a linear inequality) to exclude fractional solutions while 
retaining feasible integer points. These methods iteratively refine and solve the problem, improving 
computational efficiency by avoiding exhaustive searches. Consider an IP problem where we aim to 
maximize Z =  3x1 +  4x2, subject to the constraints x1 +  2x2 ≤ 8 and x1, x2 ≥ 0, with x1 and x2 required 
to be integers. Using B&B, we solve the linear relaxation (ignoring integer constraints), yielding 
a solution of x1 =  4, x2 =  2. We then branch by creating subproblems where x1 ≤ 3 and x1 ≥ 4, con -
tinuing to solve and prune subproblems until the optimal integer solution is found.
Figure 5.11  illustrates the B&B tree used to solve a knapsack problem, a combinatorial optimiza -
tion challenge where the goal is to maximize the value of items placed in a knapsack without exceeding 
its weight capacity. The tree starts with the initial node labeled “Start” (value =   0, weight =   0), where 
no items have been considered yet. From this node, the algorithm branches out, evaluating two 
choices: Include item 1 (value =   40, weight =   2) or exclude item 1 (value =   0, weight =   0). Each 
choice generates a new branch, exploring the impact of either including or excluding the item. As 
the tree progresses, it evaluates further branches for item 2, following the same process of including 
or excluding the item. Nodes that exceed the weight capacity are marked as pruned/  infeasible, indi -
cating that these paths do not satisfy the problem’s constraints and are thus discarded from fur -
ther consideration. The algorithm eventually reaches the optimal node (value =   190, weight =   10), 
representing the best possible solution that maximizes the value while staying within the weight 
limit. This node is highlighted to signify that the optimal solution has been found.
Figure 5.12  illustrates the cutting plane method for solving an integer linear programming (ILP) 
problem. This approach refines the feasible region of a linear programming problem to efficiently iden -
tify integer solutions. The plot presents a system of constraints, each represented as a line: −x − 2y ≤ 
−3 (blue line), x +   2y ≤ 8 (green line), and 2x +   y ≤ 10 (purple line). These constraints collectively form 
the feasible region, shaded in light gray, where all points satisfy the inequalities simultaneously. The 
objective is to find an integer solution within this region that optimizes the objective function. To achieve 
this, the figure shows two cutting planes represented by dashed lines. Cutting plane 1, marked as a red 
dashed line, adds an additional constraint to exclude non-  integer solutions from the feasible region. 
Cutting plane 2, shown as an orange dashed line, further refines the solution space, ensuring that only 
integer solutions remain. The optimal solution, indicated by a yellow dot within the feasible region, 
represents the best integer solution that meets all constraints while optimizing the objective function.
5.3.11   e volutionary  algorithm S
Evolutionary algorithms (EAs) are optimization techniques inspired by natural selection. They 
simulate the biological principles of evolution, including survival of the fittest, to solve complex 
problems in various fields such as computer science and engineering. These are the basic concepts:
 •Population:  A group of potential solutions.
 •Chromosomes:  Each potential solution.
 •Genes:  Elements of a solution.
 •Fitness:  The quality or suitability of a solution.  

--- PDF PAGE 165 ---
152 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
FIGURE 5.11  Branch and Bound tree for knapsack problem.
  newgenrtpdf

--- PDF PAGE 166 ---
153 Optimization Theory
The major steps in EAs are:
 •Initialization:  Generate an initial population of possible solutions randomly.
 •Selection:  Choose solutions based on fitness to contribute to the next generation. Higher 
fitness increases the likelihood of selection.
 •Crossover (Recombination):  Combine selected solutions to create new ones, mimicking 
reproduction.
 •Mutation:  Introduce small changes to new solutions with a certain probability to ensure gen -
etic diversity.
 •Replacement:  Replace the old population with the new one.
 •Termination:  Repeat the process until a stopping criterion is met, such as a maximum number 
of generations or a satisfactory fitness level.
The types of EAs include genetic algorithms (GAs), which are the most popular type and use muta -
tion, crossover, and selection to evolve potential solutions. Genetic programming evolves computer 
programs as solutions, while differential evolution is used for real-  valued function optimization. 
Evolution strategies focus on strategy parameters such as mutation strength, and evolutionary pro -
gramming focuses on the mutation of finite-  state machines. The main applications of EAs include 
function optimization, where they are used to find the maximum or minimum of functions. In machine 
learning, they are used for feature selection, hyperparameter tuning, and neural network training. 
The advantages of EAs include flexibility, as they can be applied to a wide range of problems, and 
global search capabilities, as they have a higher likelihood of finding global optima than many trad -
itional methods. They also support parallelism, allowing for the simultaneous evaluation of many 
FIGURE 5.12  Cutting plane method.  

--- PDF PAGE 167 ---
154 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
solutions, which can be done in parallel with modern hardware. However, the limitations include 
being computationally intensive, as the required computational resources can grow significantly 
with problem size and complexity. Additionally, they do not provide certainty, often offering rea -
sonable solutions without guaranteeing the global optimum. In GAs, the fitness function evaluates 
each solution x:
 Fitnessxf x ()=() 
The process involves applying selection, where individuals are chosen based on fitness scores. This 
is followed by crossover, which generates new offspring by combining traits from selected individ -
uals. Finally, mutation is applied by randomly altering some genes to maintain diversity within the 
population and prevent premature convergence. This iterative process continues until the stopping 
criteria are met, typically optimizing the objective function. Suppose you are optimizing a function 
f(x) =  −x2 +  4x. You initialize a population of 10 potential solutions (chromosomes) for the variable 
x, each with random values between 0 and 5. The fitness of each solution is calculated using the 
objective function f(x), and after selection, crossover, and mutation steps, the best solution x =  2, 
with a fitness value of f(2) =   4, is found after 100 generations.
Figure 5.13 , demonstrates the application of a GA to optimize the Rastrigin function, a common 
benchmark problem in evolutionary computation. The Rastrigin function, known for its large search 
space and many local minima, is defined as f dx x
id
iix()=⋅ +− ()
=∑ 10 10 2
12cos( ) π , where d is the 
FIGURE 5.13  Genetic algorithm optimization of Rastrigin function. 
  

--- PDF PAGE 168 ---
155 Optimization Theory
number of dimensions. This example plots the function in two dimensions over the range [−5.12, 
5.12] for x and y. The contours are filled using the colormap, visually representing the function’s 
values across the grid. A color bar on the side indicates the corresponding function values. The GA 
is executed to find the minimum value of the Rastrigin function over 50 generations with a popula -
tion size of 100, selecting 20 parents in each generation and applying a mutation rate of 0.1. The best 
solution the GA finds is highlighted with a red dot on the contour map, indicating the optimal point.
5.4  GLOBAL VERSUS LOCAL OPTIMA
Understanding the difference between global and local best solutions in optimization is very 
important because it affects how we find the best answer to a problem. This challenge is especially 
significant in complex problems where the solution landscape has many ups and downs. A global 
optimum is the absolute best solution among all possible options. For problems where we want to 
minimize something (like cost), it’s the lowest point. For problems where we want to maximize 
something (like profit), it’s the highest point. A local optimum, on the other hand, is a solution that’s 
better than nearby options but might not be the best overall, like finding a small hill that isn’t the 
tallest mountain. You can think of the function we’re trying to optimize as a landscape with hills and 
valleys. The local optima are the smaller hills and valleys, while the global optimum is the highest 
hill or the deepest valley. Many optimization methods might get stuck at a local optimum, depending 
on where they start. When there are multiple local optima, the landscape becomes rugged, making 
it harder to find the global best solution. In simpler problems, called convex problems, any local 
optimum is also a global optimum, which makes finding the best solution easier. However, in more 
complicated, non-  convex problems, it’s hard to tell if the solution we found is the absolute best 
without knowing the whole landscape. To avoid getting stuck at local optima, we can use sev -
eral strategies. One method is random restarts, where we run the optimization multiple times from 
different starting points to increase the chances of finding the global optimum. Another technique is 
simulated annealing, which is inspired by the process of slowly cooling metal to make its structure 
more uniform—  a practice in metallurgy. In optimization, this means occasionally accepting worse 
solutions to escape local optima and explore more possibilities. We can also use GAs, which mimic 
natural selection by keeping a group of possible solutions and combining them in new ways, hoping 
to find better solutions through processes similar to mutation and crossover in biology. Swarm intel -
ligence techniques, like particle swarm optimization, use multiple agents that move through the 
solution space, sharing information to find the best solution together. In real-  world applications 
such as machine learning, finance, and engineering, optimization problems often have complex 
landscapes with many local optima. Whether we end up at a local or global optimum can greatly 
affect performance, costs, and outcomes. While we can’t always guarantee we’ll find the global best 
solution, using different techniques, monitoring how the solution progresses, and understanding the 
problem better can help us get closer to it.
A general optimization problem can be represented as:
 Minimizefx x () ∈, 
where f(x) is the objective function, and S is the solution space. A global minimum is defined as:
 f xf xx*()≤()∀∈,  
A local minimum occurs when:
 f xf xx x**, ()≤()∀in then eighborhood of   
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 169 ---
156 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
Strategies like simulated annealing or GAs are used to escape local optima and find the global min -
imum in complex landscapes. Consider a non-  convex function f xx x()=− +4332 . The function  
has two local minima and one global minimum. A local minimum occurs at x =  2, where f(2) =   2,  
but the global minimum occurs at x =  0.5, where f(0.5) =   −0.375. If an optimization algorithm starts  
near x =  2, it may converge to the local minimum instead of the global minimum.
Figure 5.14  presents the plot of the function f xx x()=−⋅+ ( ) () 122 showing its behavior across 
the domain with key points. The graph illustrates the different types of extrema, including a local 
minimum, a local maximum, and a global minimum. The function initially rises to a local maximum 
at the point (−0.60, 3.58), marked in green. This point is where the function reaches a temporary peak 
before declining. As the graph continues, it reaches a local minimum at (−2, 0), highlighted in red. 
This local minimum indicates a point where the function temporarily decreases before increasing 
again. However, this is not the lowest value the function can attain within the entire domain. Further 
along, the function drops to the global minimum at the point (1, 0), shown in orange. This global 
minimum represents the lowest point of the function across its entire domain, indicating the true 
minimum value of f(x). Beyond this point, the function rises again.
5.5  RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN OPTIMIZATION
The rise of big data and more powerful computers has greatly changed the field of optimization. New 
developments such as distributed and real-  time optimization, quantum computing, and advances in 
machine learning are key areas of current research. These advancements are driven by the need 
to solve large problems efficiently and make quick decisions. As data grows rapidly, optimiza -
tion algorithms need to process huge amounts of information effectively. Big data often involves 
FIGURE 5.14  Global versus local optima. 
  

--- PDF PAGE 170 ---
157 Optimization Theory
complex, high-  dimensional spaces where traditional methods may not work well, so new strategies 
are needed to handle these challenges. Optimization tasks are now often spread out and run across 
multiple computers or nodes, which helps in dealing with large-  scale problems. However, this brings 
challenges like ensuring data security, keeping everything synchronized, and managing communica -
tion between nodes. Optimization is also very important in situations that need immediate solutions 
or decisions in a short time, often as data is being created. Examples include self-  driving cars and 
high-  speed trading systems. These applications must balance speed and accuracy to compute quickly 
without losing solution quality. Quantum computers, which use principles from quantum mechanics, 
offer incredible computing power. Algorithms like the quantum approximate optimization algorithm 
(QAOA) are being developed to tap into this potential, possibly bringing big changes to fields like 
cryptography, materials science, and machine learning. Machine learning, especially deep learning, 
relies a lot on optimization to train models. At the same time, machine learning techniques are 
improving optimization algorithms. Automated systems help in choosing the best machine learning 
models and fine-  tuning their settings. In real-  world situations that often have uncertain or noisy data, 
robust optimization finds solutions that work well under different scenarios, while stochastic opti -
mization deals with uncertainties in constraints and objectives. Moreover, real-  world problems often 
have conflicting goals, leading to new methods that aim to find the best possible solutions where 
improving one goal doesn’t make another worse. Optimization is going through a major change, 
driven by new technologies and the complexities of modern problems. As we move further into the 
digital age, optimization remains essential for finding efficient and effective solutions in a rapidly 
changing world. In distributed optimization, we often solve a problem by spreading it across mul -
tiple computers or nodes. This can be represented as:
 Minimiz ex Xfx fx
in
i ()= ()∈
=∑
1 
where:
 •fi(x) is the local objective function on the ith node,
 •X is the shared feasible set across nodes.
Techniques such as distributed gradient descent are used to optimize functions across mul -
tiple machines, significantly speeding up the process for large-  scale data. Consider an optimiza -
tion problem in high-  frequency trading that requires decision-  making in less than a millisecond. 
Using real-  time optimization, an algorithm balances speed and accuracy by processing 1 million 
transactions per second across 100 nodes, reducing latency from 5 milliseconds to 1 millisecond.
Figure 5.15  demonstrates the process of distributed optimization applied to the objective 
function f xx x()=+210sin( ) . The function’s behavior, represented by the blue curve, displays 
the combined effects of a quadratic term and a sinusoidal component, resulting in multiple local 
minima and maxima across the domain. The function’s domain is divided into different regions, 
each assigned to a separate node, indicated by distinct shaded areas. Node 1, represented in dark 
gray, Node 2 in green, Node 3 in tan, Node 4 in pink, and Node 5 in light blue, each handle a specific 
segment of the function. The results from each node are marked with dots, showing where each node 
has found significant points such as local minima or maxima. For example, Node 1 identifies a point 
at (−6.00, 38.79), while Node 3 finds a local minimum at (−2.00, −5.09). The figure illustrates how 
distributed optimization techniques divide the problem into smaller, manageable parts, allowing 
each node to optimize the function locally within its region. This approach not only enhances com -
putational efficiency but also allows for parallel processing, which is especially advantageous for 
large-  scale or complex optimization problems.  

--- PDF PAGE 171 ---
158 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
FIGURE 5.15  Distributed optimization.
  newgenrtpdf

--- PDF PAGE 172 ---
159 Optimization Theory
5.6  OPTIMIZATION METHODS IN DEEP LEARNING
Optimization in deep learning is crucial because the goal is to minimize (or sometimes maximize) 
a loss function. This loss function measures how far our predictions are from the actual values. By 
optimizing this function, we ensure that our model generalizes well to new, unseen data.
5.6.1   Batch gradient  deScent (Bgd)
BGD, specifically, calculates the gradient of the loss function with respect to each parameter for 
the entire training dataset at once. BGD guarantees convergence to the global optimum for convex 
functions and is straightforward to implement. It systematically reduces the loss function by taking 
steps proportional to the negative gradient of the loss function. The steps are controlled by a learning 
rate, which determines the size of each step. The algorithm works by first initializing the parameters 
randomly. Then, for each iteration, the gradient of the loss function with respect to each parameter 
is calculated using the entire dataset. The parameters are updated by subtracting the product of the 
learning rate and the gradient. This process is repeated until the parameters converge to values that 
minimize the loss function. However, BGD is not feasible for large datasets that do not fit in memory. 
It can also be slow on extensive datasets due to the need to process the entire dataset for each update. 
This means that every iteration can be time-  consuming, especially for high-  dimensional data. The 
update rule for BGD is:
 θ θα θnewo ld=− ∇ ()J 
where:
 •θ is the parameter vector,
 •α is the learning rate, and
 •∇J(θ) is the gradient of the loss function J(θ), calculated over the entire dataset.
This process is repeated until convergence, minimizing the loss function for the entire dataset. 
Suppose you are training a linear regression model to predict house prices. The loss function is the 
mean squared error (MSE), and you have a dataset with 1,000 houses. Using BGD, you calculate the 
gradient of the loss function for all 1,000 houses in each iteration. With a learning rate of α =  0.01, 
the parameters θ are updated by subtracting α × ∇J(θ) from the current values. For example, if the 
gradient of the loss function at a specific iteration is ∇J(θ) =  [1.5, −2.0], and the current parameter 
values are θ =  [2.0, 3.0], the updated parameters will be calculated as:
 θ θα θnewc urrent=− ×∇ ()J 
Substituting the values:
 θnew=[] −×−= ][ −+ = ][ 2030 00 11 52 02 00 015 30 00 21 985 .,.. ., .. ., .. ., 3 30 2 .  
This process continues until the parameters θ converge to values that minimize the loss function, 
ensuring the model provides the best predictions for house prices based on the training data. 
BGD ensures smooth updates, but its computational cost can become a bottleneck for very large 
datasets. 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 173 ---
160 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
5.6.2   Stocha Stic gradient  deScent (Sgd)
SGD is an optimization algorithm used to minimize the loss function by iteratively adjusting the 
model parameters. Unlike BGD, which computes the gradient using the entire dataset, SGD computes 
the gradient using only a single sample (or a small batch) at each iteration. SGD is known for its 
faster convergence compared to BGD, especially when dealing with large datasets. As it updates the 
parameters more frequently, it often reaches a good solution faster. Additionally, the noisy updates 
from using individual samples can help SGD escape local optima, providing a better chance of 
finding a global optimum in non-  convex optimization problems. The algorithm works by first initial -
izing the parameters randomly. For each iteration, it selects a random sample from the dataset and 
computes the gradient of the loss function with respect to each parameter. The parameters are then 
updated by subtracting the product of the learning rate and the gradient. This process is repeated, 
and a new random sample is selected at each iteration until convergence. However, the high vari -
ance in updates can cause SGD to oscillate around the minimum, making convergence harder to 
control. This variability means that while SGD can quickly reach the vicinity of the optimal solu -
tion, it might struggle to settle precisely at the minimum. Techniques such as learning rate decay, 
momentum, and mini-  batching are often employed to mitigate these issues and stabilize conver -
gence. The update rule for SGD is:
 θ θα θnewo ld=− ∇ ()()()Jx yii;,  
where:
 •θ is the parameter vector,
 •α is the learning rate, and
 •∇()()()Jx yiiθ;,  is the gradient of the loss function computed for the single sample xyii()()( ), .
This process repeats, updating the model for each random sample, allowing faster convergence in 
large datasets. Suppose you are training a model to predict stock prices with a dataset of 10,000 
samples. In each iteration, SGD randomly selects one sample and updates the parameters based on 
that sample. If the learning rate α= 0.001 and the gradient for a specific iteration is 0.5, the parameter 
θ is updated as:
 θ θθnewo ld old=− ×= −0 001 05 0 0005 .. .  
5.6.3   m ini- Batch gradient  deScent
Mini-  batch gradient descent is an optimization algorithm that offers a compromise between BGD 
and SGD. It updates the model parameters based on smaller subsets, or “mini-  batches,” of the 
dataset. Mini-  batch gradient descent combines the advantages of both BGD and SGD. By using 
mini-  batches, it reduces the variance in parameter updates compared to SGD, leading to more stable 
convergence. At the same time, it does not require processing the entire dataset in each iteration, 
making it more efficient than BGD. This approach can also benefit from parallelized hardware, such 
as Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), which can process mini-  batches concurrently. The algorithm 
works by first initializing the parameters randomly. Each iteration randomly selects a mini-  batch 
of samples from the dataset and computes the gradient of the loss function with respect to the 
parameters using only this mini-  batch. The parameters are then updated by subtracting the product 
of the learning rate and the gradient. This process is repeated for each mini-  batch until the entire 
dataset has been processed, completing one epoch. The procedure is iterated over multiple epochs 
until convergence. One of the key considerations in mini-  BGD is the choice of batch size. The batch  
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 174 ---
161 Optimization Theory
size can significantly impact performance and convergence speed. A smaller batch size offers noisier 
updates and may benefit from the regularization effects similar to those of SGD. In contrast, a larger 
batch size provides a more accurate estimate of the gradient, leading to more stable updates, but at 
the cost of computational efficiency. The update rule for mini-  BGD is:
 θ θα θnewo ld=− ∇ ()
=()()∑1
1mJx y
im
ii;,  
where:
 •θ is the parameter vector,
 •α is the learning rate,
 •m is the mini-  batch size, and
 •∇()()()Jx yiiθ;,  is the gradient of the loss function computed for the mini-  batch samples 
xyii()()( ), .
This method strikes a balance between the computational efficiency of BGD and the frequent 
updates of SGD. Suppose you are training a neural network with 10,000 samples, and you decide 
to use a mini-  batch size of 100. In each iteration, you randomly select 100 samples from the dataset 
and compute the gradient. If the learning rate α =  0.01 and the average gradient for the mini-  batch 
is 0.4, the parameter θ is updated as:
 θ θθnewo ld old=− ×= −00 10 40 004 .. .  
5.6.4   m omentum
Momentum is an optimization technique used to accelerate gradient descent by considering past 
gradients in the update process. This approach helps gradient descent algorithms converge faster 
and reduce oscillations, especially in cases where the objective function’s surface has features of 
different scales or saddle points. The key idea behind momentum is to maintain a velocity vector 
that accumulates the gradient of the loss function over time. This accumulated gradient is used to 
update the model parameters, resulting in faster convergence and smoother trajectories. The velocity 
vector is updated using a combination of the current gradient and the previous velocity. The updated 
equations for gradient descent with momentum are as follows:
 vv ftt t=+ ∇ ()−βα θ1 
 θ θtt tv+=−1 
where:
 •vt is the velocity vector at iteration t,
 •β is the momentum term (a hyperparameter typically set between 0 and 1),
 •∇()ftθis the gradient of the loss function with respect to the parameters at iteration t,
 •θtare the model parameters at iteration t, and
 •α is the learning rate.
The momentum term β controls the contribution of the previous gradients to the current update. 
A higher momentum value emphasizes the past gradients more, leading to faster convergence but  
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 175 ---
162 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
potentially overshooting the minimum if set too high. Momentum offers several advantages. It 
accelerates convergence compared to vanilla SGD, particularly in the presence of saddle points or 
when the features have different scales. Reducing fluctuations helps the optimization process navi -
gate the parameter space more efficiently and reach the optimum faster. However, momentum also 
introduces an additional hyperparameter, the momentum term β, which requires tuning. The choice 
of β can also significantly impact the performance of the optimization algorithm, and finding the 
optimal value often involves empirical experimentation. Assume we’re optimizing a simple quad -
ratic function using gradient descent with momentum. The function we want to minimize is:
 f xx()=−() 32 
For example, if the parameters are:
 •Learning rate ( α): 0.1,
 •Momentum ( β): 0.9,
 •Initial value of x: 0 (starting point), and
 •Gradient at iteration t is gt =  2(xt−3)
At iteration 1, starting from x0 =  0:
 •Gradient is: g1 =  2(x0−3) =   2(0−3) =   −6
 •Velocity update is: vvg10109 00 16 06=+ =× +× − ()=− βα .. .
 •Parameter update is: x1 =  x0 -  v1 =  0 -  (−0.6) =   0.6
At iteration 2:
 •Gradient is: g2 =  2(x1−3) =   2(−0.6 − 3) =   −7.2
 •Velocity update is: vvg21209 06 01 72 12 6=+ =× −( )+× − ( )=− βα .. .. .
 •Parameter update is: x2 =  x1 -  v2 =  −0.6 -   (−1.26) =   1.86
Here, you can see how the momentum term accelerates the descent by considering the past vel -
ocity v1 along with the new gradient g2, leading to a faster movement toward the minimum at x =  3. 
As the iterations progress, the oscillations are reduced, allowing the algorithm to converge more 
efficiently.
5.6.5   a dagrad  (adaptive  gradient  algorithm )
Adagrad is an optimization algorithm that adapts the learning rates of all model parameters by 
scaling them inversely proportional to the square root of the sum of all historical squared gradients. 
This method is particularly useful for dealing with sparse data and features that have varying degrees 
of informativeness. The key idea behind Adagrad is to adjust the learning rate for each parameter 
individually, allowing for larger updates for infrequent parameters and smaller updates for frequent 
ones. This is achieved by accumulating the squared gradients over time and using this accumulated 
value to adjust the learning rates. The update rule for Adagrad is as follows:
 gg fti ti ti,, ,() =+ ∇ ()−12θ  
 θ θαθti ti
titigf,,
,,=−
+∇()−−11  
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 176 ---
163 Optimization Theory
where:
 •∇()ftiθ, is the gradient of the loss function with respect to parameter i at iteration t,
 •gt,i is the sum of the squares of the gradients with respect to parameter i up to iteration t,
 •α is the global learning rate, and
 •is a small constant added to prevent division by zero.
Adagrad is particularly advantageous for dealing with sparse data, where some features are much 
more informative than others. By scaling the learning rate based on historical gradients, Adagrad 
ensures that infrequent but informative features receive larger updates, improving the model’s ability 
to learn from these features. However, one of the main drawbacks of Adagrad is that the learning 
rate can decrease significantly over time, causing the algorithm to stop learning prematurely. As the 
sum of squared gradients grows, the effective learning rate diminishes, which can hinder further 
progress, especially in non-  convex optimization problems or over long training periods. Assume we 
are optimizing a simple function:
 f xy xy,()=+222 
For example, if the parameters are:
 •Global learning rate ( α): 0.1
 •Small constant ( ϵ): 10−8
 •Initial values of x0 =  2, y0 =  2
At iteration 1, we calculate the gradients for x and y:
 •Gradient of x: gx1 =  2x0 =  2 × 2 =   4
 •Gradient of y: gy1 =  4y0 =  4 × 2 =   8
 •Accumulated squared gradients for x and y: Gg Ggxx yy1122
112241 68 64== == ==,
 •Update rule for x1: xx
Gg
xx10
118201
16 1042 01 11 9 =−
+×= −
+×=−× =
−α
...
 •Update rule for y1: yy
Gg
yy10
118201
64 1082 01 11 9 =−
+×= −
+×=−× =
−α
...
At iteration 2:
 •Gradients at new values x1 =  1.9, y1 =  1.9: .. ,. .ggxy2221 93 84 19 76=× == ×=
 •Accumulated squared gradients:
 GG gG Ggxx xy yy21 222
21 22216 38 30 44 64 76 121 76=+=+ == += +=.. ,. .  
 •Update rule for x2: x281901
30 44 1038 19 0 069 1 831 =−
+×≈ −=
−..
... ..
 •Update rule for y2: y281901
121 76 1076 19 0 069 1 831 =−
+×≈ −=
−..
... ..
As you can see, the learning rate for both x and y decreased slightly at the second iteration due to 
the accumulation of squared gradients. This helps balance the learning, allowing more updates to  
  

--- PDF PAGE 177 ---
164 Mathematical Foundations for Deep Learning
infrequent parameters while slowing down updates to frequent ones. However, over many iterations, 
the learning rate will continue to diminish.
5.6.6   r oot mean SQuare propagation  (rmSprop)
RMSprop is an optimization algorithm designed to address the issue of diminishing learning rates in 
Adagrad. By introducing a decay factor, RMSprop ensures that the learning rate does not decrease 
too aggressively, making it more suitable for training deep networks. RMSprop modifies Adagrad by 
maintaining a moving average of the squared gradients instead of accumulating all the past squared 
gradients. This moving average helps to prevent the learning rates from becoming excessively small, 
allowing the optimization process to continue learning effectively over time. The update rule for 
RMSprop is as follows:
 gfti ti,,=∇()θ 
 EgE ggti ti ti,, ,()2
1221= ][+−()−ββ  
 θ θα
ti ti
titiEgg+=−
+12,,
,, 
where:
 •gt,i is the gradient of the function f with respect to the parameter θi at iteration t,
 •β is the decay rate (typically set to 0.9),
 •Egti,2 is the moving average of squared gradients for parameter i up to iteration t,
 •θt+ 1,i is the updated parameter,
 •α is the global learning rate,
 •ϵ is a small constant to prevent division by zero.
RMSprop’s decay rate γ controls how much the algorithm considers the recent gradients compared 
to the past gradients. By adjusting this parameter, RMSprop can balance the influence of the current 
gradient and the historical gradients, preventing the learning rate from diminishing too quickly. The 
main advantage of RMSprop is that it resolves Adagrad’s problem of diminishing learning rates, 
making it more suitable for training deep neural networks. The controlled adjustment of learning 
rates allows RMSprop to maintain a more consistent and effective learning process, even over 
extended training periods. Assume we are optimizing a simple function:
 f xx()=−() 22 
For example, if the parameters are:
 •Global learning rate ( α): 0.01,
 •Decay rate ( β): 0.9,
 •Small constant ( ϵ): 10−8, and
 •Initial value of x0 =  4.
At iteration 1, we calculate the gradient for x:
 •Gradient at x0: gx1 =  2(x0−2) =   2(4−2) =   4
 •Exponential moving average of squared gradients (starting from 0): 
 
 
 
  

--- PDF PAGE 178 ---
165 Optimization Theory
 EgE ggxx x12
02
12210 9001 41 6= ][+−() =× +× = ββ .. .  
 •Update rule for x1: xx
Egg
xx10
1218400 1
16 1044 01 39 =−
+×= −
+×≈ −=
−α
.
...
At iteration 2:
 •Gradient at x1 =  3.9: gx2 =  2(3.9−2) =   3.8
 •Update the exponential moving average of squared gradients:
 Egx22209 16 01 38 2 928 =× +× =.... .  
 •Update rule for x2: x283900 1
2 928 1038 39 00 73 83 =−
+×≈ −=
−..
... ..
In this example, RMSprop adjusts the learning rate dynamically by calculating the exponentially 
decaying average of past squared gradients. This prevents the learning rate from diminishing too 
rapidly, as seen with Adagrad, allowing for more controlled and consistent updates to x.
5.6.7   a dam (adaptive  moment  eStimation )
Adam is an optimization algorithm that combines the benefits of both Adagrad and RMSprop. 
It leverages the advantages of adaptive learning rates and incorporates momentum to accelerate 
convergence and stabilize updates. Adam maintains individual learning rates for each param -
eter by computing the first and second moments of the gradients. The first moment is the mean 
of the gradients, and the second is the gradients’ uncentered variance. These moments are used 
to adapt the learning rates for each parameter dynamically. The updated rules for Adam are as 
follows:
 gftt=∇()θ 
 m mgtt t=+ − ()−ββ11 11  
 vv gtt t=+ − ()−ββ21 221  
 ˆmm
tt
t=−11β 
 ˆvv
tt
t=−12β 
 θ θα
tt
ttvm+=−
+1ˆˆ
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  